---
layout: post
title: How to prepare for SDN
date: 2014-06-15
categories: [computer science]
tags: [big data]

---

## Article Source
* Title: [How to Prepare for SDN](http://www.quadratek.net/blog/2014/5/2/how-to-prepare-for-sdn)

---

[![](http://sungsoo.github.com/images/sdn.png)](http://sungsoo.github.com/images/sdn.png)

---

# How to Prepare for SDN

Software defined networking is a relativelty new practice that requires
a lot of work to implement successfully. If you are planning to make the
jump to SDN, let’s firstly consider its benefits to your business.

For a business implementing SDN practices it’s wise to understand how it
all works. There are a number of different services offered by a wide
variety of providers and those options alone require a lot of hard work
and time. There’s the potential to opt for open source and bare metal
switching but there are also commercial offerings that a business could
successfully exploit.

The most important consideration is firstly auditing your existing
network to discover if it will support SDN as is or if there’s also the
task of upgrading it for SDN support.

---

![](http://sungsoo.github.com/images/sdn-api.png)

---

# A guide to help you prepare for SDN implementation.


1.    Education and research
---

One of the main stumbling blocks for a business before it implements new
technology is the fact that it often doesn’t understand the software.
It’s advisable to really get to grips with it and understand what it’s
compromised of and how the business will benefit from it.

Familiarising yourself with new technology should always be the first
step before actually installing it. A business should have an awareness
of both how SDN could benefit or hinder its productivity. Remember that
just because many businesses are adopting and singing the praises of SDN
it may not be the right tool for your particular ser-up. Make sure that
you read up on the subject and that you are conscious of the variety of
iterations of SDN – you may even find that you have your own unique spin
on this technology.

As with most things in business, implementing software defined
networking takes planning.Without this, you may find that it’s not the
technology you needed and it’s actually negatively impacting your
business.

2.    Have a plan
----

Every business has different wants and needs and as such you should
carefully lay out what you hope to achieve. There are so many things to
consider from open standards to virtualised Layer 4 – 7 services, but
the need for those options rests squarely on whether or not it benefits
your business. SDN has numerous applications but a business needs to be
certain that it’s using the networking tool in a way that moves the
business forwards and doesn’t impede on productivity.

SDN has a great ability to utilise analytics and packet monitoring due
to its application in rapidly steering traffic with only a few mouse
clicks. The orchestration and automation of business networks can save
money and time. Determine your business goals and figure out how SDN can
get you there. Then implement it slowly and at considered and well
thought out points.

3.    Be safe and secure
----

The great strength of SDN lies in the fact that all networked online
services become centralised to one controller. This strength is perhaps
also SDNs greatest flaw and it’s important that a business prepares and
defends against potential attacks from hackers or the accessing of
malicious content by employees. A business must have policies in place
that ensure that the controller knows exactly how to deal with any given
situation.

4.    The right time to start
----

Data centres are the targeted market of SDN principles and much of the
automation, orchestration, capital and operational cost reduction perks
are fairly obvious. Start when the implementation is at its easiest and
perhaps start by educating employees on the new systems being
considered. When a new system is implemented there will always be a
marked drop in productivity if the introduction of that technology is
not coupled with educational resources. Ensure that your business is
prepared and you’ll likely be nearing a good point to implement SDN
technologies.

5.    Consider how you start
---

As we considered earlier, SDN requires careful planning before it is
utilised. Start small and test SDN implementation in samples that are
easy to analyse. Understanding the data and how these new principles
benefit your business means that you can target and tweak a wider roll
out much more successfully.

Once it’s all working on a smaller scale you can easily roll it out to
your whole IT infrastructure in controlled bursts. When it’s all working
in a manner that suits your business you can start considering some of
the new, more innovative applications of SDN. It can facilitate the
combination of both the development and operations networks into one
homogenous blend that allows a place for new software to be tested and
quickly moved into production.

SDN implementation is a huge task for a business and one that shouldn’t
be undertaken lightly. Remember that not every business needs these
principles so before spending lots of money and changing the way things
work; make sure that SDN is an answer to a specific problem that your
business is experiencing.
