---
layout: post
title: Creativity in Business
date: 2014-05-29
categories: [literature]
tags: [liberal arts]

---

## Article Source
* Title: [The 3 myths about creativity in business](http://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2014/jan/17/3-myths-creativity-in-business)



# The 3 myths about creativity in business 

Creativity is vital in business; far too important to be left to a
special cadre of 'creative people'. Charles Andrew outlines three myths
about creativity in business that impede success and three key steps to
overcome it

![Rear view of boy at chalkboard doing math formulas and scratching
head](http://static.guim.co.uk/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2013/10/3/1380801263253/Rear-view-of-boy-at-chalk-010.jpg)
#### Is it possible to be both analytical and creative? Photograph: RubberBall / Alamy/Alamy

A business whose only ambition is to continue doing tomorrow what they
did yesterday, will wither as both its competitors and customers change
around it. The central role of creativity in business survival was
recognised in an IBM survey of more than 1,500 chief executive officers
from 60 countries. They reported that – more than rigour, management
discipline, or even vision – successfully navigating an increasing
complex world will require creativity. But despite the focus on
creativity and the proliferation of good advice, the solution still
seems to be illusive. Maybe this is because there are three underlying
cultural beliefs about what creativity really is, who has it, and how it
can be managed (or not) that are acting as unseen barriers.

## Myth 1. Analytical thought and creative thought are fundamentally different

Neuroscience is giving us ever deeper insight into the mysterious
processes of the human brain. It is revealing that new ideas often
emerge from the juxtaposing of existing information in the parts of the
brain that we associate with more 'rational' processing and analytical
thought. Understanding this, we can elevate the pursuit of creativity to
a discipline that mirrors this neural process; systematically
assembling, analysing, and challenging data about today in order to
develop new possibilities for tomorrow.

Campbell's, the American food giant, has done exactly this; bringing
rigour and process to the creative development of new product ideas, and
not just to their subsequent evaluation – as often happens elsewhere.

## Myth 2. Analytical people are generally not creative people


This often follows from the first myth. If the modes of thought are so
different, then maybe the people having those thoughts must be different
too. So if businesses need more creativity, it is a problem to be solved
either through recruitment or external consultants. Either way, this
perpetuates the division between 'creativity' and the core disciplines
of business. And as we learn from organisational psychology, this
cultural separation means that creativity, where it occurs, will remain
largely peripheral and low impact.

By contrast, smart companies such as Procter & Gamble and GSK are
especially strong at integrating scientists (often seen only as strong
rational thinkers) into the early stages of innovation where
capabilities in consumer empathy and imaginative thinking are equally
vital.

## Myth 3. Creativity is about making great leaps of imagination


The myth of the creative genius suddenly arriving at great ideas in a
puff of brilliant inspiration continues to do much harm because it
prevents us from recognising what is really necessary in the creative
process; the on-going, painstaking, development of fresh perspectives
and the nurturing of initially small ideas in order to gradually create
something significantly innovative.

The problem with our observation of change is that we tend to see only
the end result and we don't see the process that led to it. Beethoven,
for instance, would gradually develop a whole symphony based on taking a
short melody which he would then adapt and restate. This process of
continually building on, and nurturing, an initial (small) idea is more
realistic and systematically effective.

## Top tips:

* The first step to an idea is not to try to have one, but to
marshal the perspectives and inspiration from which ideas originate.
Focus on collecting, not judging; the relevance may only occur to you
later
* Think 'outside in': use empathy to view your business from the
customer's point of view. Stop seeing them as merely a chooser and user
of your services, but as a real person. Put yourself in their shoes
* Systematically challenge everything that's important to the way you do
business now. Nurture ideas that initially seem flawed to explore
whether they lead you somewhere significant 




