---
layout: post
title: Actian Unleashes SQL Users on Hadoop with Easy Access, Faster Performance
date: 2014-08-08
categories: [computer science]
tags: [big data, big data]

---

## Article Source
* Title: [Actian Unleashes SQL Users on Hadoop with Easy Access, Faster Performance](http://www.idevnews.com/stories/6278/Actian-Unleashes-SQL-Users-on-Hadoop-with-Easy-Access-Faster-Performance)
* Authors: Vance McCarthy

# Actian Unleashes SQL Users on Hadoop with Easy Access, Faster Performance
=========


Actian’s approach to big data aims to break down barriers that often
frustrate companies trying to wring more value and performance from
Hadoop.  Actian Analytics Platform - Hadoop SQL Edition throws the doors
wide open for millions of SQL users, offering easier access, faster
performance and more. IDN speaks with Actian CTO Mike Hoskins

"Today’s [Hadoop] performance is still completely unacceptable to
millions of SQL programmers out there. We want to unleash SQL users on
Hadoop."

Actian’s latest update to its Actian Analytics Platform looks to
overcome many of the barriers that often frustrate companies trying to
wring more value and performance from Hadoop.

[Actian Analytic Platform – Hadoop SQL
Edition](http://www.actian.com/products/analytics-platform/hadoop/)
throws the doors wide open for millions of SQL users, offering easier
access, faster performance and more, by bringing together a set of rich
technologies to support native SQL in Hadoop, Actian CTO Mike Hoskins
told IDN.

The gravitational force of Hadoop is increasing. Companies are dealing
with data in scale and complexity they have never seen before, and they
are going to Hadoop-type infrastructure. Old architecture is not going
to be used anymore,” Hoskins said. “So, we want to unleash SQL users on
Hadoop with easier to use and high-performance design time and runtime
[features].

Hoskins listed several key improvements Acian focused on with this
release, including:

-   Fixes for slow query speeds (or even incomplete query functionality)
    in Hive or Impala;
-   Complete ability to update or delete data; and 
-   Bringing more reliability to how ODBC/J DBC drivers connect with
    third-party BI or data visualization tools. 

Actian Analytics Platform - Hadoop SQL Edition also eliminates the need
for specialized skills, such as the need to learn MapReduce, Hoskins
added.

In the big picture, Hoskins is most proud of Actian’s efforts to deliver
what he called “SQL completeness” to Hadoop. This is where all of SQL is
fully and natively supported – without compromise or trade-offs – within
a HDFS (Hadoop Distributed File System) cluster, he said.

“Quite frankly, we saw the ‘State of SQL’ was under-performing, and so
we took those challenges on,” Hoskins said. “Now, we believe we’re
opening the doors wide for millions of SQL developers and users.”

Actian’s Jim Hare, senior director for product marketing, described the
under-the-covers Actian architecture this way:

> *SQL users want ‘industrialized’ SQL, which means they want mature
> enterprise-ready solutions that are fast, secure, reliable and can
> scale for all of their users and applications. Plus, they want to be
> able to use the full SQL language without constraints. And, they want
> to run SQL on the freshest Hadoop data, which means they don’t want to
> have to move data out of Hadoop into another database each time they
> want to run a query.*

We refer to [Actian’s approach] as ‘SQL in Hadoop.’ It’s mature SQL and
fully integrated into Hadoop. Actian has taken the world’s fastest
TPC-benchmarked analytic database (Actian Vector) and extended it to run
inside Hadoop natively via YARN. Industrialized SQL in Hadoop is married
with an analytics and data science workbench enabling users to discover
nuggets of valuable data hidden in Hadoop and make it accessible to all
their SQL users. In essence, Actian has transformed Hadoop from a low
cost data storage lake into a high performance analytics platform.

By bringing “industrialized SQL” technologies together in a
Hadoop-friendly way, you also get super-fast performance, Hoskins noted.


By optimizing the X100 vector processing engine (patent pending), it now
runs across every node of the massively scalable Hadoop cluster
architecture, Hoskins said. “This delivers an unimaginable performance
increase, especially for users used to using Hive or Imapala,” Hoskins
told us. Benchmarks note up to a 30-times speed increase. Actian’s
high-performance data flow engine also speeds data blending, discovery,
and predictive modeling with an embedded high performance data flow
engine.

Other barrier-breaking features of Actian Analytics Platform – Hadoop
SQL Edition are:

**Data science workbench:** Allows users to visually blend and analyze
Hadoop data – without coding.

**Libraries of analytics:**Functions to make the entire analytic process
more consumable and easier to manage.

**Parallelized pipelines:** These will help users take the best
advantage of the Hadoop cluster capacity data flow framework.

**Pre-built visual data analytics operators:**Users can visually build
end-to-end analytics workflows or data bindings in minutes with more
than 1500 pre-built “drag and drop” data analytics operators. Users can
spend less time preparing and enriching data.

**Security & Compliance:** Delivers industrial-strength DBMS security,
encompassing users, roles, and authentication with ACID-compliant
reliability

**YARN-Ready:**Support for end-to-end native analytic processing for
data blending, enrichment, analytic computation and operational BI.


We asked Hoskins what it has taken the Hadoop community to come up with
solutions like these that could broaden the reach of Hadoop and deliver
even more business impact. His response talks not just to the need to
boost Hadoop technology, but to widen the circle of technologies Hadoop
should leverage.

“In most cases, we have not been asking the right people. Until now,
enterprise SQL users have not even been in the [Hadoop] game. It’s been
a bit closed to the Hadoop programmers. And while they are just thrilled
that they’ve made Hive faster in the last three months, the truth is
that even with that jump the level of today’s performance is still
completely unacceptable to millions of SQL programmers out there,” he
told IDN.

“With our Hadoop SQL Edition, we are moving Hadoop from being a
low-value data lake, to a high-value high-performance analytics
platform. It will be transformative for big data,” he added.

At least one noted Hadoop analyst firm sees the point.

A note from a Forrester Research “Quick Take” report reads in part:
“Hadoop has largely been the domain of developers and data scientists
with programming skills. [B]ut high performing, compliant-SQL-on-Hadoop
makes it interesting and accessible to a large community of business
intelligence professionals and other SQL-jockeys in enterprises.”

Actian Analytics Platform – Hadoop SQL Edition is shipping now.