---
layout: post
title: Stinger Intiative - Making Apache Hive 100 Times Faster
date: 2014-04-29
categories: [computer science]
tags: [big data]

---

# Article Source
* Title: [Stinger Intiative - Making Apache Hive 100 Times Faster](http://hortonworks.com/blog/100x-faster-hive/)
* Authors: [Alan
Gates](http://hortonworks.com/blog/author/alan_gates/ "Posts by Alan Gates")

[![](http://sungsoo.github.com/images/stinger.png)](http://sungsoo.github.com/images/stinger.png)

# The Stinger Initiative: Making Apache Hive 100 Times Faster

**UPDATE: Since this article was posted, the Stinger initiative has
continued to drive to the goal of 100x Faster Hive. You can read the
latest information at
[http://hortonworks.com/labs/stinger](http://hortonworks.com/labs/stinger)**

Introduced by **Facebook** in 2007, [Apache
Hive](http://hive.apache.org/) and its HiveQL interface has become the
**de facto SQL interface** for Hadoop.  Today, companies of all types
and sizes use Hive to access Hadoop data in a familiar way and to extend
value to their organization or customers either directly or though a
broad ecosystem of existing BI tools that rely on this key proven
interface.  The who’s who of business analytics have already adopted
Hive.

Apache Hive was originally built for large-scale operational batch
processing and it is very effective with reporting, data mining and data
preparation use cases.  These usage patterns remain very important but
with widespread adoption of Hadoop, the enterprise requirement for
Hadoop to become more real time or interactive has increased in
importance as well. At Hortonworks, we believe in the power of the open
source community to innovate faster than any proprietary offering and
the Stinger initiative is proof of this once again as we collaborate
with others to improve Hive performance.

## So, What is Stinger?

Enabling Hive to answer human-time use cases (i.e. queries in the 5-30
second range) such as big data exploration, visualization, and
parameterized reports without needing to resort to yet another tool to
install, maintain and learn can deliver a lot of value to the large
community of users with existing Hive skills and investments.

To this end, we have launched the Stinger Initiative, with input and
participation from the broader community, to enhance Hive with more SQL
and better performance for these human-time use cases. All the while,
HiveQL remains the same before and after these advancements so it just
gets better. And in keeping with the ecosystem of existing tools, it is
complementary to best-of-breed data warehouses and analytic platforms.

[![stingerRoad](http://hortonworks.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/02/stingerRoad-300x236.png)](http://hortonworks.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/02/stingerRoad.png)

-   First,
    we are making Hive a more suitable tool for the decision support
    queries people want to perform on Hadoop.  This includes adding
    analytics features like the OVER clause, support for subqueries in
    WHERE, and aligning Hive’s type system more with the standard SQL
    model.
-   Second, we are optimizing Hive’s query execution plans and based on
    our initial changes, we have already seen query time drop by 90% on
    some of our test queries. We are also looking at additional changes
    inside Hive’s execution engine that we believe will significantly
    increase the number of records per second that a Hive task can
    process.
-   Third, we have introduced a new columnar file format (i.e. ORCFile)
    within the Hive community to provide a more modern, efficient, and
    high performing way to store Hive data.
-   And lastly, we’ve introduced a new runtime framework, called Tez,
    which aims to eliminate Hive’s latency and throughput constraints
    that result from its reliance on MapReduce. Tez optimizes Hive job
    execution by eliminating unnecessary tasks, synchronization
    barriers, and reads from and write to HDFS.  This optimizes the
    execution chain within Hadoop and drastically speeds Hive’s workload
    processing.

All of these modifications to Hive are underway in the open and an
initial preview will be available in advance of [Hadoop Summit Amsterdam
in March](http://hadoopsummit.org/amsterdam/).

## Embrace the community, Embrace Hive…

A diverse group of individuals within the Hive community are
collaborating on these efforts. As part f the community, a wide group
of people contributed to this effort, including resources from SAP,
[Microsoft](http://hortonworks.com/microsoft), Facebook and Hortonworks.

Harish Butani from SAP has led an effort to add analytics and windowing
functions to Hive.  This will add the OVER clause for use with existing
aggregate functions as well as adding analytics functions like RANK and
NTILE and windowing functions like LEAD and LAG; you can see this work
at [HIVE-896](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/HIVE-896).  Namit
Jain from Facebook has been spending a lot of time lately optimizing
Hive’s query execution planning so that it performs joins and other
operations more efficiently and with less need for hints from the user. 
Hortonworks engineers have been collaborating on these and other
community efforts to improve Hive.

Owen O’Malley, a Hortonworks co-founder and early Hadoop developer, has
been working with Facebook on the new ORCFile in order to greatly
improve performance when Hive is reading, writing, and processing data;
you can see this work at
[HIVE-3874](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/HIVE-3874). We are
also working on farther reaching changes and optimizations such as
reworking Hive’s operators to process records in blocks of a thousand or
more and thus be much more efficient than it is today.

We believe the performance changes we are making today, along with the
work being done in
[Tez](http://hortonworks.com/blog/introducing-tez-faster-hadoop-processing)
will transform Hive into a single tool that Hadoop users can use to do
report generation, ad hoc queries, and large batch jobs spanning 10s or
100s of terabytes.

Why reinvent the wheel?