---
layout: post
title: Folder Management 
date: 2014-04-17
categories: [information technology]
tags: [publications]

---

# Article Source
* Title: [10 File Management Tips](http://sbinfocanada.about.com/od/datamanagement/a/computerfilemgt.htm)
* Authors: [Susan Ward](/bio/Susan-Ward-6453.htm)


# 10 File Management Tips


## File Management Basics for Electronic Files


Being able to find files makes you so much more productive.

Thought file management was just for paper files? Think again. It's just
as important to keep the files on your computer and/or mobile devices
organized and up-to-date. Just as with paper files, the goal of computer
file management is to ensure that you can find what you're looking for,
even if you're looking for it years after its creation. These file
management tips will help you keep your files accessible:

## 1. Organize by file types.
 Make applications easier to find by creating a folder called Program
Files on your drive and keeping all your applications there. For
instance, the executables for Word, PowerPoint and Simply Accounting
would all reside in the Program Files folder.

## 2. One place for all.
 Place all documents in the My Documents folder and no where else. So
whether it’s a spreadsheet, a letter or a PowerPoint presentation, it
goes into My Documents. This will make it easier to find things and to
run backups.

## 3. Create folders in My Documents.
 These are the drawers of your computer’s filing cabinet, so to speak.
Use plain language to name your folders; you don’t want to be looking at
this list of folders in the future and wondering what “TFK” or whatever
other interesting abbreviation you invented means.

## 4. Nest folders within folders.
 Create other folders within these main folders as need arises. For
instance, a folder called “Invoices” might contain folders called
“2013”, “2012” and “2011”. A folder named for a client might include the
folders "customerdata" and "correspondence". The goal is to have every
file in a folder rather than having a bunch of orphan files listed.

## 5. Follow the file naming conventions.
 Do not use spaces in file names, keep file names under 27 characters,
and use all lower case. So a file named for a client should be
jackdawson rather than Jack Dawson. If you break any of these rules, be
consistent about it.

## 6. Be specific.
 Give files logical, specific names and include dates in file names if
possible. The goal when naming files is to be able to tell what the file
is about without having to open it and look. So if the document is a
letter to a customer reminding him that payment is overdue, call it
something like "overdue081212"; rather than something like “letter”. How
will you know who the letter is to without opening it? See the next
point.

## 7. File as you go.
 The best time to file a document is when you first create it. So get in
the habit of using the "Save As" dialogue box to file your document as
well as name it, putting it in the right place in the first place.

## 8. Order your files for your convenience.
 If there are folders or files that you use a lot, force them to the top
of the file list by renaming them with a ! or an AA at the beginning of
the file name.

## 9. Cull your files regularly.
 Sometimes what's old is obvious as in the example of the folder named
"Invoices" above. If it's not, keep your folders uncluttered by clearing
out the old files. Do **not** delete business related files unless you
are absolutely certain that you will never need the file again. Instead,
in your main collection of folders in My Documents, create a folder
called "Old" or "Inactive" and move old files into it when you come
across them.

## 10. Back up your files regularly.
 Whether you're copying your files onto another drive or onto tape, it's
important to set up and follow a regular back up regimen. See [The 3
Steps to a Successful Backup
System](http://sbinfocanada.about.com/cs/management/a/databackup.htm)
for more information.

The search function is a wonderful thing but it will never match the
ease of being able to go directly to a folder or file. If you follow
these file management tips consistently, even if you don't know where
something is, you know where it should be - a huge advantage when it
comes to finding what you're looking for.

# Summary
## Problems
	
* 윈도우즈의 경우, 원하는 파일의 위치를 **기억력**에 의존
* **파일 버전관리 문제**: "파일명-날짜-버전" 형식으로 중복하여 관리
* 빠른 **파일 검색이 어려**움: 폴더 클릭, 폴더 클릭, 폴더 클릭, 폴더 클릭, ..... "아싸! 찾았다! 파일" [폴더 클릭에 0.5초 걸린다면, 1년에 폴더클릭에 소비한 시간은 얼마일까?] 
* 폴더, 파일에 **태그, 우선순위 등의 속성 정보를 부여하기 어려움**

## 짜짠! 문제를 해결해 주마!

* Mac OS X Mavericks (10.9.2): *Desktop Spotlight, Finder Spotlight*


> 당신의 할일에 집중하세요. 나머지는 저한테 맡기세요. - DEVONthink Pro Office  

> 묻지도 말고, 따지지도 말고 DEVONthink 쓰세요! - Sung-Soo Kim

* Tag, Labeling, Status, Fast Search,.... You name it!!!
* 7-rule: 사람은 7가지 이상으로 구성된 연관관계를 기억하기가 어렵다. UML 탄생 배경



