---
layout: post
title: Stanford Network Analysis Platform(SNAP)
date: 2014-03-21
categories: [computer science]
tags: [big data, graph mining]

---

# SNAP : Stanford Network Analysis Platform


[**Stanford Network Analysis Platform (SNAP)**](http://snap.stanford.edu) is a general purpose, high performance system for analysis and manipulation of large networks.
SNAP is written in C++ and it scales to massive graphs with hundreds of millions of nodes and billions of edges.

## Compiling on Mac OSX

To compile on Mac OSX, using Xcode:

1. From the Toolbar, select Scheme (e.g. 'bigclam').
2. Product -> Build.  (or Cmd + B).
3. Run executable via the command line; or
   Choose the scheme's executable (Product -> Edit Scheme -> Run -> Info)
   and run: Product -> Run (or Cmd + R). 
   Note: If using Gnuplot, add the PATH to the scheme's environment variables.
     or create symlink to /usr/bin:
     
    ```
     sudo ln -s <gnuplot_dir>/gnuplot /usr/bin/
     ```
For code completion, the "docs" target has been created which includes all Snap-related files and example programs.
  
## SNAP tutorials

Sample programs demonstrating the use of foundational SNAP classes and
functionality are available in the tutorials directory.

To compile all the tutorials, execute the following command line:

```
  cd tutorials; make all    # generates all the tutorials
```

## SNAP unit tests

Unit tests are available in the test directory.

To run unit tests, install googletest (code.google.com/p/googletest) and
execute:
```
  cd test; make run    # compiles and runs all the tests
```  

<div id="right-column">

<h1>SNAP Package Description</h1>

<ul>
  <li><a href="#dirs">SNAP Directory Structure</a></li>
  <li><a href="#samples">Example Applications</a></li>
  <li><a href="#files">Functionality of the Core SNAP Library</a></li>
</ul>
<a name="dirs"></a><h2>SNAP Directory Structure</h2>

<p>The SNAP package contains the following directories:</p>
<ul>
  <li><tt>snap-core:</tt>the core SNAP graph library;</li>
  <li><tt>snap-adv:</tt>advanced SNAP components, not in the core, but used by examples;</li>
  <li><tt>snap-exp:</tt>experimental SNAP components, still in development;</li>
  <li><tt>examples:</tt>small sample applications that demonstrate SNAP functionality;</li>
  <li><tt>tutorials:</tt>simple programs, demonstrating use of various classes;</li>
  <li><tt>glib-core:</tt> STL-like library that implements basic data structures, like vectors (<tt>TVec</tt>), hash-tables (<tt>THash</tt>) and strings (<tt>TStr</tt>), provides serialization and so on;</li>
  <li><tt>test:</tt>unit tests for various classes;</li>
  <li><tt>doxygen:</tt>SNAP reference manuals.</li>
</ul>

<a name="samples"></a><h2>Example Applications</h2>
<ul>
  <li><b>agmfit:</b> Detects network communities from a given network by fitting the Affiliation Graph Model (AGM) to the given network by maximum likelihood estimation.</li>
  <li><b>agmgen:</b> Implements the Affiliation Graph Model (AGM). AGM generates a realistic looking graph from the community affiliation of the nodes.</li>
  <li><b>bigclam:</b> Formulates community detection problems into non-negative matrix factorization and discovers community membership factors of nodes.</li>
  <li><b>cascades:</b> Simulates a SI (susceptible-infected) model on a network and computes structural properties of cascades.</li>
  <li><b>centrality:</b> Computes node centrality measures for a graph: closeness, eigen, degree, betweenness, page rank, hubs and authorities.</li>
  <li><b>cliques:</b> Finds overlapping dense groups of nodes in networks, based on the Clique Percolation Method.</li>
  <li><b>community:</b> Implements network community detection algorithms: Girvan-Newman and Clauset-Newman-Moore.</li>
  <li><b>concomp:</b> Computes weakly, strongly and biconnected connected components, articulation points and bridge edges of a graph.</li>
  <li><b>forestfire:</b> Generates graphs using the Forest Fire model.</li>
  <li><b>graphgen:</b> Generates undirected graphs using one of the many SNAP graph generators.</li>
  <li><b>graphhash:</b> Demonstrates the use of <tt>TGHash</tt> graph hash table, useful for counting frequencies of small subgraphs or information cascades.</li>
  <li><b>infopath:</b> Implements stochastic algorithm for dynamic network inference from cascade data, see <a href="http://snap.stanford.edu/infopath">Structure and Dynamics of Information Pathways in On-Line Media</a></li>
  <li><b>kcores:</b> Computes the k-core decomposition of the network and plots the number of nodes in a k-core of a graph as a function of k.</li>
  <li><b>kronem:</b> Estimates Kronecker graph parameter matrix using EM algorithm.</li>
  <li><b>kronfit:</b> Estimates Kronecker graph parameter matrix.</li>
  <li><b>krongen:</b> Generates Kronecker graphs.</li>
  <li><b>magfit:</b> Estimates Multiplicative Attribute Graph (MAG) model parameter.</li>
  <li><b>maggen:</b> Generates Multiplicative Attribute Graphs (MAG).</li>
  <li><b>mkdatasets:</b> Demonstrates how to load different kinds of networks in various network formats and how to compute various statistics of the network.</li>
  <li><b>motifs:</b> Counts the number of occurence of every possible subgraph on K nodes in the network.</li>
  <li><b>ncpplot:</b> Plots the Network Community Profile (NCP).</li>
  <li><b>netevol:</b> Computes properties of an evolving network, like evolution of diameter, densification power law, degree distribution, etc.</li>
  <li><b>netinf:</b> Implements netinf algorithm for network inference from cascade data, see <a href="http://snap.stanford.edu/netinf">Inferring Networks of Diffusion and Influence</a></li>
  <li><b>netstat:</b> Computes structural properties of a static network, like degree distribution, hop plot, clustering coefficient, distribution of sizes of connected components, spectral properties of graph adjacency matrix, etc.</li>
  <li><b>testgraph:</b> Demonstrates some of the basic SNAP functionality.</li>
</ul>

<a name="files"></a><h2>Functionality of the Core SNAP Library</h2>

<p>Brief description of SNAP functionality implemented in various files in the distribution package:</p>

  <table id="datatab" summary="Table of datasets" border=1>

    <tr><th colspan="2"><b>snap-core</b></th></tr>
    <tr><td class="fixed-width">alg.h</td><td>Simple algorithms like counting node degrees, simple graph manipulation (adding/deleting self edges, deleting isolated nodes) and testing whether graph is a tree or a star.</td></tr>
    <tr><td class="fixed-width">anf.h</td><td>Approximate Neighborhood Function: linear time algorithm to approximately calculate the diameter of massive graphs.</td></tr>
    <tr><td class="fixed-width">bfsdfs.h</td><td>Algorithms based on Breath First Search (BFS) and Depth First Search (DFS): shortest paths, spanning trees, graph diameter, and similar.</td></tr>
    <tr><td class="fixed-width">bignet.h</td><td>Memory efficient implementation of a network with data on nodes. Use when working with very large networks.</td></tr>
    <tr><td class="fixed-width">centr.h</td><td>Node centrality measures: closeness, betweenness, PageRank, ...</td></tr>
    <tr><td class="fixed-width">cmty.h</td><td>Algorithms for network community detection: Modularity, Girvan-Newman, Clauset-Newman-Moore.</td></tr>
    <tr><td class="fixed-width">cncom.h</td><td>Connected components: weakly, strongly and biconnected components, articular nodes and bridge edges.</td></tr>
    <tr><td class="fixed-width">ff.h</td><td>Forest Fire model for generating networks that densify and have shrinking diameters.</td></tr>
    <tr><td class="fixed-width">gbase.h</td><td>Defines flags that are used to identify functionality of graphs.</td></tr>
    <tr><td class="fixed-width">ggen.h</td><td>Various graph generators: random graphs, copying model, preferential attachment, RMAT, configuration model, Small world model.</td></tr>
    <tr><td class="fixed-width">ghash.h</td><td>Hash table with directed graphs (<tt>TNGraph</tt>) as keys. Uses efficient adaptive approximate graph isomorphism testing to scale to large graphs. Useful when one wants to count frequencies of various small subgraphs or cascades.</td></tr>
    <tr><td class="fixed-width">gio.h</td><td>Graph input output. Methods for loading and saving various textual and XML based graph formats: Pajek, ORA, DynNet, GraphML (GML), Matlab.</td></tr>
    <tr><td class="fixed-width">graph.h</td><td>Implements graph types <tt>TUNGraph</tt>, <tt>TNGraph</tt> and <tt>TNEGraph</tt>.</td></tr>
    <tr><td class="fixed-width">gstat.h</td><td>Computes many structural properties of static and evolving networks.</td></tr>
    <tr><td class="fixed-width">gsvd.h</td><td>Eigen and singular value decomposition of graph adjacency matrix.</td></tr>
    <tr><td class="fixed-width">gviz.h</td><td>Interface to Graphviz.</td></tr>
    <tr><td class="fixed-width">kcore.h</td><td>K-core decomposition of networks.</td></tr>
    <tr><td class="fixed-width">network.h</td><td>Implements network types <tt>TNodeNet</tt>, <tt>TNodeEDatNet</tt> and <tt>TNodeEdgeNet.</tt></td></tr>
    <tr><td class="fixed-width">Snap.h</td><td>Main include file of the library.</td></tr>
    <tr><td class="fixed-width">statplot.h</td><td>Plots of various structural network properties: clustering, degrees, diameter, spectrum, connected components.</td></tr>
    <tr><td class="fixed-width">subgraph.h</td><td>Extracting subgraphs and converting between different graph/network types.</td></tr>
    <tr><td class="fixed-width">timenet.h</td><td>Temporally evolving networks.</td></tr>
    <tr><td class="fixed-width">triad.h </td><td>Functions for counting triads (triples of connected nodes in the network) and computing clustering coefficient.</td></tr>
    <tr><td class="fixed-width">util.h</td><td>Utilities to manipulate PDFs, CDFs and CCDFs. Quick and dirty string manipulation, URL and domain manipulation routines.</td></tr>

    <tr><th colspan="2"><b>snap-adv</b></th></tr>
    <tr><td class="fixed-width">agm.h</td><td>Implements the Affiliation Graph Model (AGM).</td></tr>
    <tr><td class="fixed-width">cliques.h</td><td>Maximal clique detection and Clique Percolation method.</td></tr>
    <tr><td class="fixed-width">graphcounter.h</td><td>Performs fast graph isomorphism testing to count the frequency of topologically distinct sub-graphs.</td></tr>
    <tr><td class="fixed-width">kronecker.h</td><td>Kronecker Graph generator and KronFit algorithm for estimating parameters of Kronecker graphs.</td></tr>
    <tr><td class="fixed-width">mag.h</td><td>Implements the Multiplicative Attribute Graph (MAG).</td></tr>
    <tr><td class="fixed-width">ncp.h</td><td>Network community profile plot. Implements local spectral graph partitioning method to efficiently find communities in networks.</td></tr>
    <tr><td class="fixed-width">subgraphenum.h</td><td>Sub-graph enumeration and network motif computations.</td></tr>

    <tr><th colspan="2"><b>snap-exp</b></th></tr>
    <tr><td class="fixed-width">arxiv.h</td><td>Functions for parsing Arxiv data and standardizing author names.</td></tr>
    <tr><td class="fixed-width">dblp.h</td><td>Parser for XML dump of DBLP data.</td></tr>
    <tr><td class="fixed-width">imdbnet.h</td><td>Actors-to-movies bipartite network of IMDB.</td></tr>
    <tr><td class="fixed-width">mxdag.h</td><td>Finds the maximum directed-acyclic subgraph of a given directed graph.</td></tr>
    <tr><td class="fixed-width">signnet.h</td><td>Networks with signed (+1, -1) edges  that can denote trust/distrust between the nodes of the network.</td></tr>
    <tr><td class="fixed-width">sir.h </td><td>SIR epidemic model and SIR parameter estimation.</td></tr>
    <tr><td class="fixed-width">spinn3r.h</td><td>Past parser for loading blog post data from Spinn3r.</td></tr>
    <tr><td class="fixed-width">trawling.h</td><td>Algorithm of extracting bipartite cliques from the network.</td></tr>
    <tr><td class="fixed-width">wgtnet.h</td><td>Weighted networks.</td></tr>
    <tr><td class="fixed-width">wikinet.h</td><td>Networks based on Wikipedia.</td></tr>
  </table>

</div>
# References
[1] [*SNAP Package Description*](http://snap.stanford.edu/snap/description.html), 2013.