---
layout: post
title: TPC-DS
date: 2015-12-06
categories: [computer science]
tags: [data management]

---

	

# TPC-DS


TPC Benchmark™DS (TPC-DS): ‘The’ Benchmark Standard for decision support solutions including *Big Data*


The current TPC-DS specification can be found on the TPC Documentation Webpage.

TPC-DS is the de-facto industry standard benchmark for measuring the performance of decision support solutions including, but not limited to, Big Data systems. 
The current version is v2. It models several generally applicable aspects of a decision support system, including queries and data maintenance. 
Although the underlying business model of TPC-DS is a retail product supplier, the database schema, data population, queries, data maintenance model and implementation rules have been designed to be broadly representative of modern decision support systems.

This benchmark illustrates decision support systems that:

* Examine large volumes of data
* Give answers to real-world business questions
* Execute SQL queries of various operational requirements and complexities (e.g., ad-hoc, reporting, iterative OLAP, data mining)
* Are characterized by high CPU and IO load
* Are periodically synchronized with source OLTP databases through database maintenance functions
* Run on “Big Data” solutions, such as RDBMS as well as Hadoop/Spark based systems

TPC-DS Version 2 enables emerging technologies, such as Big Data systems, to execute the benchmark. The major changes in Version 2 are in the area of ACID (Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation and Durability), data maintenance, metric calculation and execution rules.
Major changes in Version 2 are described in its companion document.

Additional Information

* TPC-DS Specification and Tools
* [More Information about Pricing](http://www.tpc.org/information/pricing.asp)
