---
layout: post
title: Four Use Cases for Healthcare Predictive Analytics, Big Data
date: 2015-08-24
categories: [computer science]
tags: [big data]

---

## Article Source
* Title: [Four Use Cases for Healthcare Predictive Analytics, Big Data](http://healthitanalytics.com/news/four-use-cases-for-healthcare-predictive-analytics-big-data)
* Authors: [Jennifer
Bresnick](http://healthitanalytics.com/news/author/jennifer-bresnick "More articles by Jennifer Bresnick")

---

# Four Use Cases for Healthcare Predictive Analytics, Big Data 



Predictive analytics in healthcare has long been the wave of the future:
an ultimate goal to which everyone aspires but [few can claim
success](https://www.google.com/url?q=http://healthitanalytics.com/news/just-15-of-hospitals-use-predictive-analytics-infrastructure&sa=U&ei=63g2VYOYJPK_sQTQyoEg&ved=0CA4QFjADOAo&client=internal-uds-cse&usg=AFQjCNFs3izjex1yONms00UtbafE3N3sQw). 
While the landscape is changing for healthcare predictive analytics as
more organizations figure out how to harness big data and implement the
right infrastructure for generating actionable insights [from a slew of
new
sources](http://healthitanalytics.com/news/why-healthcare-big-data-analytics-needs-the-internet-of-things),
some providers may still be wondering how the pie-in-the-sky world of
big data can actually work for them. 

Luckily, a number of pioneering organizations have taken it upon
themselves to test the waters of healthcare predictive analytics,
generating use cases that spur interest and help carve a path through
the wilderness. 

![Healthcare predictive analytics and big
data](http://healthitanalytics.com/images/site/articles/_small/490822651-1.jpg)

In this article, *HealthITAnalytics.com* explores some of the ways
healthcare organizations have already found success by turning big data
into a strategic asset that can help providers react quickly and
effectively to the ongoing challenges of quality care delivery.

## Hospital quality and patient safety in the ICU

The ICU is another area where predictive analytics is becoming crucial
for patient safety and quality care.  The most vulnerable patients are
prone to [sudden
downturns](http://healthitanalytics.com/news/boston-childrene28099s-integrates-predictive-analytics-in-icu)
due to infection, sepsis, and other crisis events which are often
difficult for busy staff to predict.  However, a number of organizations
have been working on integrating bedside medical device data into
sensitive algorithms that [detect plummeting
vital](http://healthitanalytics.com/news/missile-defense-analytics-can-spot-sepsis-before-physicians)
signs hours before humans have a clue.

At the University of California Davis, researchers[are
using](https://ehrintelligence.com/news/ehr-data-analytics-help-detect-risk-outcomes-of-sepsis)
routinely collected EHR data as the fodder for an algorithm that gives
clinicians an early warning about sepsis, which has a 40 percent
mortality rate and is difficult to detect until it’s too late. “Finding
a precise and quick way to determine which patients are at high risk of
developing the disease is critically important,” said study co-author
Hien Nguyen, Associate Professor of Internal Medicine and Medical
Director of EHRs at UC Davis. “We wanted to see if EHRs could provide
the foundation for knowing when aggressive diagnosis and treatment are
needed and when they can be avoided.”   

At Massachusetts General Hospital, an analytics system called QPID [is
helping providers
ensure](http://healthitanalytics.com/news/predictive-clinical-analytics-at-mgh-turn-data-into-insights/)
that they don’t miss critical patient data during admission and
treatment.  The system is also used to predict surgical risk, helping
match patients with the right course of action that will keep them
safest during their care. “Surgeons, even the world-renown surgeons, do
not want to operate on a patient who’s going to die on the table,”
explained Dr. David Ting, Associate Medical Director for Information
Systems at the Massachusetts General Physicians Organization.  “The last
thing they want to do is do harm to a patient or do something
inappropriately.  The system automates searches using national
guidelines, and then it essentially shows the results in a dashboard
with a red, yellow, or green risk indicator for the surgeon to see.”

## Precision medicine, personalized care, and genomics

“Precision medicine” entered the healthcare industry’s lexicon [in a big
way](http://healthitanalytics.com/news/white-house-details-precision-medicine-big-data-genomics-plan/)
earlier this year during President Obama’s State of the Union address. 
The President’s vision for a nationwide patient databank sparked hopes
of a renewed commitment to genomic research and the development of
personalized treatments, but the NIH isn’t the only one who has been
using big data [to
predict](http://healthitanalytics.com/news/precision-medicine-personal-genomics-need-industry-standards)
the course of diseases related to a patient’s genetic makeup.

Healthcare predictive analytics has been [particularly
instrumental](http://healthitanalytics.com/news/big-data-analytics-research-projects-target-cancer-genomics)
in [the fight against
cancer](http://healthitanalytics.com/news/cancerlinq-will-bring-big-data-analytics-to-oncology-care),
and has also helped to target the development of preventative measures
related to [heart
disease](http://healthitanalytics.com/news/indigo-predictive-risk-scores-reduce-heart-attacks-strokes/),
diabetes, and even [food
poisoning](http://healthitanalytics.com/news/fda-uses-genomics-big-data-analytics-to-track-food-poisoning)
based on genetic research. 

## Population health management, risk stratification, and prevention

Population health management is as much about prevention as it is about
treatment, and healthcare predictive analytics equip providers with the
tools they need to be proactive about their patients’ needs.  Targeting
patients based on their past behaviors can help to predict future
events, such as a diabetic ending up in the emergency room because he
did not [refill his
medication](http://healthitanalytics.com/news/how-can-predictive-data-analytics-improve-medication-adherence/)
or [a child with
asthma](http://healthitanalytics.com/news/predictive-risk-analytics-hie-to-help-young-asthma-patients)
requiring a hospital admission due to environmental triggers of her
disease.

By harnessing EHR data, providers can even identify links between
previously disparate diseases.  A risk score developed by Kaiser
Permanente researchers in 2013 [allows
clinicians](https://ehrintelligence.com/news/ehr-analytics-predict-link-between-type-2-diabetes-dementia)
to predict diabetic patients who are likely to develop dementia in the
future, while the Army is attempting to curb the rampant rate of veteran
suicides by [leveraging a predictive risk
model](http://healthitanalytics.com/news/predictive-analytics-help-identify-military-suicide-risk)
to identify patients who may be likely to harm themselves.

“We could save four lives for every hundred people we treated” with
better data-driven care coordination and follow-up after a hospital stay
for a psychiatric episode, said Lt. Gen. Eric B. Schoomaker, a former
surgeon general of the Army and a professor of military and emergency
medicine at the Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences.
“This would be unparalleled, compared to almost any other intervention
we could make in medicine.  This study begins to show the positive
effects big data can have, when combined with administrative health
records.”

Healthcare predictive analytics can even [prevent
bottlenecks](http://healthitanalytics.com/news/online-predictive-analytics-simulator-tackles-ed-bottlenecks/)
in the urgent care department or emergency room by [analyzing patient
flow](http://healthitanalytics.com/news/can-internet-big-data-provide-predictive-analytics-in-the-ed)
during peak times to give providers the chance to schedule extra staff
or make other arrangements for access to care.

“Emergency department crowding is a complex problem affecting more than
130 million patient visits per year in the US,” writes Joshua E.
Hurwitz, lead author of a study detailing the effects of an online
patient flow simulator. “In the current world of scarce resources and
little margin for error, it is essential to rigorously identify the
speciﬁc causes of crowding, so that targeted management interventions
can have maximal effect.”

## Reducing preventable hospital readmissions

As hospitals begin to feel [the financial
pinch](https://www.google.com/url?q=https://ehrintelligence.com/news/medicare-30-day-readmission-penalties-sting-hospitals&sa=U&ei=-4E2VdPYBurksAS_3IGgBw&ved=0CAgQFjAB&client=internal-uds-cse&usg=AFQjCNFhdBax08YxB2VdCxFjOgZ9QcrCLA)
of high 30-day readmission rates, they are turning to predictive
analytics to keep patients at home.  At the University of Pennsylvania,
[informaticists can
look](http://healthitanalytics.com/news/upenn-ehr-analytics-tool-predicts-risk-of-30-day-readmissions/)
at prior hospitalization histories to flag patients who may be returning
to the inpatient setting within 30 days. 

Real-time EHR data analytics [helped a Texas
hospital](https://ehrintelligence.com/news/real-time-ehr-data-analytics-helps-reduce-readmissions-by-5)
cut readmissions by five percent by drawing on nearly 30 data elements
included in the patient’s chart. “This is one of the first prospective
studies to demonstrate how detailed data in EMRs can be used in
real-time to automatically identify and target patients at the highest
risk of readmission early in their initial hospitalization when there is
a lot that can be done to improve and coordinate their care, so they
will do well when they leave the hospital,” said Ethan Halm, MD, MPH,
Professor of Internal Medicine and Clinical Sciences and Chief of the
Division of General Internal Medicine at UT Southwestern.

Meanwhile, the Kaiser Permanente system [has been
working](http://healthitanalytics.com/news/study-automated-readmissions-review-not-yet-sensitive-enough/)
to refine its readmissions algorithms in order to better understand
which returns to the hospital [are
preventable](http://healthitanalytics.com/news/frequent-30-day-readmission-patients-skew-younger-study-says/)
and which are not, a crucial distinction for value-based reimbursements.

“Classifying readmissions as potentially preventable or not preventable
can be used to improve hospital performance,” wrote the authors of the
study comparing an algorithm to human review of readmissions cases.
“Administrators can sort potentially preventable readmissions into
categories that are actionable for improvement. They can identify trends
over time or across reporting units. Classifying readmissions as
potentially preventable or not preventable can also be used to
[establish
accountability](http://healthitanalytics.com/news/predictive-analytics-big-data-underpin-episodes-of-care)
across reporting units and reward top performers.”

