---
layout: post
title: MapReduce for C - Run Native Code in Hadoop 
date: 2015-04-25
categories: [computer science]
tags: [big data]

---


# MapReduce for C: Run Native Code in Hadoop

MR4C was originally developed at [Skybox Imaging](http://skybox.com/) to
facilitate large scale satellite image processing and geospatial data
science. We found the job tracking and cluster management capabilities
of Hadoop well-suited for scalable data handling, but also wanted to
leverage the powerful ecosystem of proven image processing libraries
developed in C and C++. While many software companies that deal with
large datasets have built proprietary systems to execute native code in
MapReduce frameworks, MR4C represents a flexible solution in this space
for use and development by the open source community.

![MR4C.png](https://lh6.googleusercontent.com/ZN4eaemjcJhJGwCv39EUAJ6OoVZS1KYPVZcLOipoW7JRUJHOUdwTjsddzrSCf7WAzVVm1xtbya9lgUV-WqJOOXWR82UY1W9T4VfGM13cs-mAG4NvEmn8rUKvO6G9KCHrnf0)

MR4C is developed around a few simple concepts that facilitate moving
your native code to Hadoop. Algorithms are stored in native shared
objects that access data from the local filesystem or any uniform
resource identifier (URI), while input/output datasets, runtime
parameters, and any external libraries are configured using JavaScript
Object Notation (JSON) files. Splitting mappers and allocating resources
can be configured with Hadoop YARN based tools or at the cluster level
for MRv1.  Workflows of multiple algorithms can be strung together using
an automatically generated configuration. There are callbacks in place
for logging and progress reporting which you can view using the Hadoop
JobTracker interface. Your workflow can be built and tested on a local
machine using exactly the same interface employed on the target cluster.

If this sounds interesting to you, get started with our documentation
and source
[code](https://github.com/google/mr4c/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md) at
the [MR4C GitHub page](https://github.com/google/mr4c).  The goal of
this project is to abstract the important details of the MapReduce
framework and allow users to focus on developing valuable algorithms.
Let us know how we're doing in our [Google
Group](https://groups.google.com/d/forum/mr4c).