---
layout: post
title: 6 Big Data Analytics Use Cases for Healthcare IT
date: 2015-08-26
categories: [computer science]
tags: [big data]

---


## Article Source
* Title: [6 Big Data Analytics Use Cases for Healthcare IT](http://www.cio.com/article/2386531/healthcare/healthcare-6-big-data-analytics-use-cases-for-healthcare-it.html)
* Authors: [Brian Eastwood](http://www.cio.com/author/Brian-Eastwood/)

---

6 Big Data Analytics Use Cases for Healthcare IT 
================================================

> Making use of the petabytes of patient data that healthcare organizations possess requires extracting it from legacy systems, normalizing it and then building applications that can make sense of it. That's a tall order, but the facilities that pull it off can learn a lot. 


BOSTON—The increasing digitization of healthcare data means that
organizations often add terabytes' worth of patient records to data
centers annually.

At the moment, much of that unstructured data sits unused, having been
retained largely (if not solely) for regulatory purposes. However, as
speakers at the inaugural [Medical Informatics
World](http://www.medicalinformaticsworld.com/) conference suggest, a
little bit of data analytics know-how can go a long way.

![Big
Data](http://images.techhive.com/images/idge/imported/article/cio/2013/04/23/hp-a-bigdata-100340834-orig.jpg)

It isn't easy, namely because the demand for [healthcare IT
skills](http://www.cio.com/slideshow/detail/70112#slide1) far outpaces
the supply of workers able to fill job openings, but a better grasp of
that data means knowing more about individual patients as well as large
groups of them and knowing how to use that information to provide
better, more efficient and less expensive care.

**Feature: [13 Healthcare IT Trends and Predictions for
2013](http://www.cio.com/slideshow/detail/83055)**

Here are six real-world examples of how healthcare can use [big data
analytics](http://www.forbes.com/sites/netapp/2013/04/17/healthcare-big-data/).

## 1. Ditch the Cookbook, Move to Evidence-Based Medicine

[Cookbook
medicine](http://whendoctorsdontlisten.blogspot.com/2012/07/perils-of-cookbook-medicine.html")
refers to the practice of applying the same battery of tests to all
patients who come into the emergency department with similar symptoms.
This is efficient, but it's rarely effective. As Dr. Leana Wan, an ED
physician and co-author of [When Doctors Don't
Listen](http://whendoctorsdontlisten.com/), puts it, "Having our patient
be 'ruled out' for a heart attack while he has gallstone pain doesn't
help anyone."

[Dr. John Halamka](http://geekdoctor.blogspot.com/), CIO at Boston's
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, says access to patient data—even
from competing institutions—helps caregivers take an evidence-based
approach to medicine. To that end, Beth Israel is rolling out a
smartphone app that uses a Web-based- drag-and-drop UI to give
caregivers self-service access to 200 million data points about 2
million patients.

**Analysis: [Is Healthcare IT Interoperability (Almost)
Here?](http://www.cio.com/article/731757/Is_Healthcare_IT_Interoperability_Almost_Here_)**

Admittedly, the [health information
exchange](http://www.cio.com/article/731009/Health_Information_Exchange_Critical_But_Suffers_From_Complications)
process necessary for getting that patient data isn't easy, Halamka
says. Even when data's in hand, analytics can be complicated; what one
electronic health record (EHR) system calls "high blood pressure" a
second may call "elevated blood pressure" and a third "hypertension." To
combat this, Beth Israel is encoding physician notes using the [SNOMED
CT
standard](http://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/umls/Snomed/snomed_main.html).
In addition to the benefit of standardization, using SNOMED CT makes
data more searchable, which aids the research query process.

## 2. Give Everyone a Chance to Participate

The practice of medicine cannot succeed without research, but the
research process itself is flawed, says Leonard D'Avolio, associate
center director of biomedical informatics for
[MAVERIC](http://maveric.org/) within the U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs. Randomized controlled trials can last many years and cost
millions of dollars, he says, while observational studies can suffer
from inherent bias.

The VA's remedy has been the [Million Veteran
Program](http://www.research.va.gov/resdev/mvp/), a voluntary research
program that's using blood samples and other health information from
U.S. military veterans to study how genes affect one's health. So far,
more than 150,000 veterans have enrolled, D'Avolio says.

All data is available to the VA's 3,300 researchers and its hospital
academic affiliates. The idea, he says, is to embed the clinical trial
within VistA, the VA EHR system, with the data then used to augment
clinical decision support.

## 3. Build Apps That Make EHR 'Smart'

A data warehouse is great, says John D'Amore, founder of clinical
analytics software vendor
[Clinfometrics](http://www.clinfometrics.com/), but it's the healthcare
equivalent of a battleship that's big and powerful but comes with a
hefty price tag and isn't suitable for many types of battles. It's
better to use lightweight drones—in this case, applications—which are
easy to build in order to accomplish a specific task.

To accomplish this, you'll need records that adhere to the [Continuity
of Care Document (CCD)
standard](http://www.hl7.org/implement/standards/product_brief.cfm?product_id=6).
A [certified
EHR](http://www.healthit.gov/policy-researchers-implementers/certified-health-it-product-list-chpl)
must be able to generate a CCD file, and this is often done in the form
of a patient care summary. In addition, D'Amore says, you'll need to use
SNOMED CT as well as [LOINC](http://loinc.org/) to standardize your
terminology.

Echoing Halamka, co-presenter [Dean
Sittig](http://www.uthouston.edu/sbmi/faculty-and-staff/dean-sittig.htm),
professor in the [School of Biomedical
Informatics](http://www.uthouston.edu/sbmi/index.htm) at the University
of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, acknowledges that this isn't
easy. Stage 1 of [meaningful
use](http://www.healthit.gov/policy-researchers-implementers/meaningful-use),
the government incentive program that encourages EHR use, only makes the
testing of care summary exchange optional, and at the moment fewer than
25 percent of hospitals are doing so.

The inability or EHR, health and wellness apps to communicate among
themselves is a "significant limitation," Sittig says. This is something
providers will learn the hard way when stage 2 of meaningful use begins
in 2014, D'Amore adds.

**Gartner: [Big Data, EHR Driving Healthcare IT
Innovation](http://www.cio.com/article/722987/Big_Data_EHR_Driving_Healthcare_IT_Innovation)**

That said, the data that's available in CCD files can be put to use in
several ways, D'Amore says, ranging from predictive analytics that can
reduce hospital readmissions to data mining rules that look at patient
charts from previous visits to fill gaps in current charts. The latter
scenario has been proven to nearly double the number of problems that
get documented in the patient record, he adds.

## 4. 'Domesticate' Data for Better Public Health Reporting, Research

Stage 2 of meaningful use requires organizations to submit syndromic
surveillance data, immunization registries and other information to
public health agencies. This, says Brian Dixon, assistant professor of
health informatics at Indiana University and research scientist with the
[Regenstrief Institute](http://www.regenstrief.org/), offers a great
opportunity to "normalize" raw patient data by mapping it to LOINC and
SNOMED CT, as well as by performing real-time [natural language
processing](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Natural_language_processing)
and using tools such as the [Notifiable Condition
Detector](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3243144/) to
determine which conditions are worth reporting.

**Report: [Lack of Healthcare IT Workers Slows Tech
Progress](http://www.cio.com/article/730167/Lack_of_Healthcare_IT_Workers_Slows_Tech_Progress)**

Dixon compares this process to the [Neolithic
Revolution](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neolithic_Revolution) that
refers to the shift from hunter-gatherer to agrarian society
approximately 12,000 years ago. Healthcare organizations no longer need
to hunt for and gather data; now, he says, the challenge is to
domesticate and tame the data for an informaticist's provision and
control.

The benefits of this process—in addition to meeting regulatory
requirements—include research that takes into account demographic
information as well as corollary tests related to specific treatments.
This eliminates gaps in records that public health agencies often must
fill with phone calls to already burdened healthcare organizations,
Dixon notes. In return, the community data that physicians receive from
public health agencies will be robust enough to offer what Dixon dubs
"population health decision support."

## 5. Make Healthcare IT Vendors Articulate SOA Strategy

Dr. Mark Dente, managing director and chief medical officer for MBS
Services, recommends that healthcare organizations "aggregate clinical
data at whatever level you can afford to do it," then normalize that
data (as others explain above). This capability to normalize data sets
in part explains the growth and success of providers such as Kaiser
Permanente and Intermountain Healthcare, he says.

**Survey: [Health IT Early Adopters Poised for Big Data Advances in
Clinical
Medicine](http://www.cio.com/article/731099/Health_IT_Early_Adopters_Well_Poised_for_Big_Data_Advances_in_Clinical_Medicine)**

To do this, you need to create modules and apps such as the ones D'Amore
describes. This often requires linking contemporary data sets to legacy
IT architecture. The [MUMPS](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MUMPS)
programming language, originally designed in 1966, has served
healthcare's data processing needs well, but data extraction is
difficult, Dente says.

Service oriented architecture is the answer, Dente says, because it can
be built to host today's data sets—as well as tomorrow's, from sources
that organizations don't even know they need yet. (This could range from
personal medical devices to a patient's grocery store rewards card.)
Challenge vendors on their SOA strategy, Dente says, and be wary of
those who don't have one.

## 6. Use Free Public Health Data For Informed Strategic Planning

Strategic plans for healthcare organizations often resort to reactive
responses to the competitive market and a "built it and they will come"
mentality, says Les Jebson, director of the [Diabetes Center of
Excellence](http://diabetes.ufl.edu/) within the University of Florida
Academic Health System. Taking a more proactive approach requires little
more than a some programming know-how.

**Related: [Taking Healthcare IT Seriously Demands Culture
Changes](http://www.cio.com/article/724350/Taking_Healthcare_IT_Seriously_Demands_Culture_Changes_)**

Using Google Maps and free public health data, the University of Florida
created heat maps for municipalities based on numerous factors, from
population growth to chronic disease rates, and compared those factors
to the availability of medical services in those areas. When merged with
internal data, strategic planning becomes both visually compelling
(critical for C-level executives) and objective (critical for population
health management), Jebson says.

With this mapping, for example, the university found three Florida
counties that were underserved for breast cancer screening and thus
redirected its mobile care units accordingly.


