---
layout: post
title: Business unIntelligence
date: 2015-08-13
categories: [computer science]
tags: [big data]

---

## Article Source
* Title: [Business unIntelligence](http://www.enterprisemanagement360.com/blog/business-unintelligence-barry-devlin-2/)
* Arthors: Barry Devlin

---

# ‘Business unIntelligence’ by Barry Devlin


**9sight Consulting Founder and Principal, Barry Devlin, discusses why
business intelligence, usually seen by enterprises as the industry
standard in enabling raw data to drive insight and judgement, might only
be one part of the future decision making toolset. **

Since its birth in the 1990s, business intelligence (BI) has been
consistently rated across all industries as a must-have for effective
understanding and management of business. However, the term *business
intelligence* itself has long struck me as something of an oxymoron.
Much of the business behaviour I’ve encountered has been far from
intelligent. Perhaps I’m a little cynical, but *business unintelligence*
seemed a more appropriate term, with decisions sometimes taken despite
information available and BI often relegated to little more than
generating reports filled with backward-looking data. Furthermore,
intelligence is surely setting the bar far too low in the second decade
of the 21^st^ century; can’t business do better? What about intuition,
insight or inspiration? Add social and collaborative aspects — given
that business is largely a collective, collaborative venture—and we have
the need for and possibility of something far more sophisticated.
Perhaps, I thought, *Business unIntelligence* could be more than the
opposite of, but the solution to the problems besetting BI today? Could
the cognitive dissonance of the phrase spur business into action, to
finally benefit from extensive information, adaptive processes and the
strengths of actual people? Rationality of thought and far beyond it.
Logic of process, predefined and emergent. The confluence of reason and
inspiration, emotion and intention, collaboration and competition—all
that comprises the human and social milieu that is business. A fully
holistic approach to the entire information, process and people resource
of the enterprise. Not business intelligence. But *Business
unIntelligence—Insight and Innovation beyond Analytics and Big Data.*

So, what does Business unIntelligence look like? Let’s start with the
business/technological drivers and move to an architectural picture
designed to support them.

Technological advances, particularly in mobile communications and
computing, have moved business to an increasingly real-time, interactive
model. Reporting needs are instantaneous and actions must anticipate
customer needs rather than react to them. A symbiosis between business
and technology is now evident—a *biz-tech ecosystem* that increasingly
drives all successful business change. More recently, the terms
*business*, *operational*, *predictive* (and more) *analytics* have come
into vogue, with a strong emphasis on forecasting future trends and
behaviour to enable faster or more appropriate action—a clear evolution
of BI thinking from focusing on the past to envisaging the future. Big
data has opened up previously unimaginable types and amounts of
information, but has driven even more silos of un-integrated data than
ever before. Multi-core parallel processors and ever-cheaper memory
promise the merging of operational and informational systems (for
example, in SAP HANA), allowing adaptive but highly integrated decision
processes that span from operations to strategic planning. Meanwhile,
the explosion of social networking tools is enabling collaborative
working in business, and simultaneously exposing the human and social
underpinnings of how business really works.

For many business people, the preceding paragraph makes for difficult
reading. The central role of information technology in all future
successful businesses demands a rather simple model around which
business and IT people can engage and define the technology-centred
business of tomorrow—and even of today. The IDEAL architecture, shown in
Figure 1, offers that model. IDEAL is both a goal of the approach and an
acronym: *integrated*, in information and process; *distributed*,
organisationally and geographically; *emergent*, in the sense of a
mathematically chaotic system; *adaptive*, to the changing needs of
business and possibilities of technology; and *latent*, meaning hidden
behind the actual implementation. At a high level, this is a deceptively
simple picture. Three spaces of interest: information — all information
— as the foundation, process as the intermediate functionality, and
people as both the driver and receiver of all below. Read it as a simple
vision statement: people process information. Moreover, each of these
spaces is defined by three axes that describe its characteristics in
terms that business and IT can both use to understand business needs and
technical possibilities. For example, the timeliness/consistency axis of
information allows coherent discussion about the trade-offs involved
when business moves from a make and sell model to on-demand production.
The relationships between the three layers and nine axes provide a
fertile soil for the biz-tech ecosystem to seed and thrive.

[![Figure
1](http://www.enterprisemanagement360.com/wp-content/uploads/Figure-1-300x282.jpg)](http://www.enterprisemanagement360.com/wp-content/uploads/Figure-1.jpg)  
**Figure 1**


For most traditional IT people, the information and process spaces are
of most interest. Here we develop a REAL logical architecture that
describes how the technological components operate and interrelate. Of
particular relevance is a realignment of information within the business
from layers in a single, relational technology, through which
information passes sequentially, to pillars fed and processed in
parallel in the most appropriate technology for the business needs. We
also see that metadata — a long-standing issue for most BI projects and
more recently a legal loophole for governmental and marketing
intelligence projects — is clearly information, central to the
understanding of all information. In fact, it is renamed context-setting
information (CSI) in this approach to emphasise this fact. However, the
scope of this lower level architecture is such that it cannot be covered
adequately in this short article. A series of blog posts
[elsewhere](http://bit.ly/17m7uz9) provides more details.

The remainder of this article focuses instead on the people space, where
most change is needed. This is, indeed, emerging as advances in
psychology and neurobiology are reinventing our understanding of how and
why people behave as they do and how they actually make decisions. As
background, we note that BI has, since its inception, been predicated on
the theory of rational choice decision making. In this model, much
favoured by business schools and management consultants since at least
the 1970s, decision makers are described as making choices between
different alternatives based on defining objectives, making long lists
of pros and cons, adding measures of utility, multiplying by
probability, and coming to rational conclusions. In such circumstances,
the more information one has to hand on any situation can only lead to
better decisions. However, even as early as 1967, Russell Ackoff (later
of DIKW pyramid fame) was declaring that managers suffer from an
over-abundance of irrelevant information. Rational choice is still much
loved by economists, at least according to Tim Harford in *The Logic of
Life* (2008): “*Economists are always looking for the hidden logic
behind life, the way it is shaped by countless unseen rational
decisions.”* I suspect that many would disagree, from personal
experience of post-2008 economics or in our roles supporting BI
initiatives in businesses.

In contrast, German psychologist, Gerd Gigerenzer, proposes in *Gut
Feelings: The Intelligence of the Unconscious* (2007) that the mind
should be seen as an *adaptive toolbox* that has developed a wide range
of rules of thumb to best deal with a highly uncertain environment,
characterized by ill-defined problems and opportunities, with loose and
changeable rules and variable definitions of success. This actual, real
world in which we live is computationally intractable; any real decision
of business interest cannot be solved conclusively with any conceivable
amount of information and processing power. Decision making, using of
this adaptive toolbox of heuristics, can often reach conclusions more
quickly and directly than logic. Rationality remains, of course, valid,
valuable and often necessary, but has been promoted to the exclusion of
all other approaches since the Age of Enlightenment in the 17^th^
century. A broader and more inclusive model, which we may call
*insight*, includes intuition and the more classical intelligence. Human
intuition — which, of necessity, ignores some available information may
reach good conclusions based on the largest number of *relevant* factors
than human intelligence, which may seek too much information and try to
balance all possible outcomes. Furthermore, people often prefer to
include a certain amount of ambiguity in their formulation of problems
and solutions; they tend to bet on reciprocity in their dealings with
others to co-create the best solutions to shared opportunities and
challenges.

This leads us to modern findings in neuroscience, which clearly show
that human mental processes span a number of levels, from primitive
survival mechanisms to social interactions, which are all intimately
involved in every aspect of our behaviour, including business
relationships and decision making. When the human mind works well
together, we are integrated and our relationships thrive. Our decision
making is sound. We attune to others, allowing our own internal state to
shift; we resonate and align with the inner world of another. This
resonance is at the heart of *empathy*. Intuition gives us access to the
wisdom of the body — that gut-feel of the “right decision” — coming from
the interior of the body, our viscera, and our heartfelt sense of what
to do. In *Mindsight: The New Science of Personal Transformation*
(2010), neurobiologist and psychiatrist, Daniel Siegel, contends that
*“this integrative function illuminates how reasoning, once thought to
be a ‘purely logical’ mode of thinking, is in fact dependent on the
non-rational processing of our bodies. Such intuition helps us make wise
decisions, not just logical ones”*. Insight and empathy help us connect
the past to the present and the anticipated future. This *insightful
decision making* seamlessly combines left and right brain, and takes
account of intuitive and emotional responses to reach an integrated and
well-rounded position on the decision in hand.

In my experience, the above thinking often proves challenging for
traditional BI and IT people, who question how it relates to information
technology and how it can be applied in support of business decision
making. However, applied it must be, if we are to move beyond the failed
belief that ever more information necessarily leads to ever better
decisions, a myth that is particularly prevalent in the big data scene.
One way that we can move forward is through the adoption of
collaborative and social tools that support teamwork and, through that,
on-going innovation. Of particular interest here is *informal
information*, the soft information gathered and exchanged (often
unconsciously) between team members in the course of a project. Such
information ranges from personal notes, to casual comments and even to
bodily postures and facial expressions. These titbits of information are
increasingly being (or capable of being) recorded, as our interactions
become more and more electronically intermediated. Notes are made on
tablets, conversations are recorded, interactions videoed. And, although
it may smack of “Big Brother” and there are serious ethical
considerations to take into account, this recorded information offers a
wealth of insight into how the team works, who contributes, who is
enthused and how and where ideas emerge or are stifled. Analysis of such
interactions over the longer term can become a basis for encouraging and
rewarding innovation, as well as detecting behaviours that run contrary
to the aims or ethos of the organisation.

[![biun](http://www.enterprisemanagement360.com/wp-content/uploads/biun-200x300.jpg)](http://www.enterprisemanagement360.com/wp-content/uploads/biun.jpg)

Business unIntelligence thus extends traditional BI in a variety of important
ways. It recognises and positions the vaguely defined big data, so that
it can be integrated into the information fabric of the organisation. It
demarcates the processes that comprise all decision making at an
organizational level. And it recognises and includes the true human
characteristics — emotional, intuitive and social — that, in addition to
rational thought, underpin all personal decision making in life and in
business.

Finally, Business unIntelligence brings into clear focus the moral and
ethical dilemmas raised by our collection of enormous volumes of data
and widespread use of powerful analytics. To what end will we choose to
use this technology? The good of humanity or the advancement of the few?
To solve the burgeoning problems that beset this overcrowded, tiny blue
planet or to drive a new wave of lust for consumption that will surely
overwhelm us all?

—

*Dr. Barry Devlin is among the foremost authorities on business insight
and one of the founders of data warehousing, having published the first
architectural paper on the topic in 1988. With over 30 years of IT
experience, including 20 years with IBM as a Distinguished Engineer, he
is a widely respected analyst, consultant, lecturer and author of the
seminal book, “Data Warehouse—from Architecture to Implementation” and
numerous White Papers. His 2013 book, “Business unIntelligence—Insight
and Innovation beyond Analytics and Big Data” is available from Technics
Publications.*

** **

**Barry Devlin**

**Founder and Principal**

**9sight Consulting**

Barry is founder and principal of 9sight Consulting. He specializes in
the human, organizational and IT implications of deep business insight
solutions that combine operational, informational and collaborative
environments. A regular contributor to BeyeNETWORK, SmartDataCollective
and TDWI, Barry is based in Cape Town, South Africa and operates
worldwide.

