---
layout: post
title: Sparks of Genius
date: 2016-01-10
categories: [liberal arts]
tags: [publications]

---

# Sparks of Genius 
## The 13 thinking tools of the world’s most creative people
By Robert & Michele Root-Bernstein. 

## Chapter 1 – Rethinking Thinking

Invention presupposes imagination. Einstein once revealed to his friend,

> “The words of the language, as they are written or spoken, do not seem
to play any role in my mechanism of thought” 

Some scientists insist that thinking in feelings and mental images can be rationally manipulated.

MIT Prof. Richard Feynman (Nobel Prize winner) told once, 
> “Mathematics is the form in which we express our understanding of nature, but it is
not the content of that understanding”

In Creating minds and Frames of mind, scientists are logico-mathamatical
thinkers, poets and writers are highly verbal thinkers, psychologists as
intrapersonal thinkers and politicians as interpersonal thinkers.

Poincre (greatest mathematician in19th century) once said, “it is by
logic we prove, but by intuition that we discover...”

French physician Armand Trousseau agreed, 
> “All science touches on art; all art has its scientific side. The worst scientist is he who is not an artist; the worst artist is he who is no scientist.


Sculptor Naum Gabo once wrote. 
> “Every great scientist has experiences a moment when the artist in him saved the scientist”

Various professions including medicine are beginning to recognize
intuition as a necessary part of disciplinary thinking.

## Chapter 2 – Schooling the Imagination

Takes about something Indian philosophy where it is based on ‘Maya’ –
virtual reality. It is easier to see things with eye closed as you can
imagine things.

Einstein stated categorically “In creative work, imagination is more
important than knowledge.

Our perception of reality depends upon the kind and quality of Illusions
we conjure. This is what Picasso meant when he said, “Art is a like that
makes us realize the truth”.

The problem with current education is, it does not connect different
knowledge to solve problems.

Harvard psychologist “In so distinguished institution like MIT, a
student can learn and have mastered calculus to the satisfaction of the
teacher by having solved the problem set on the final examination. On
entering the physics course, he cannot see how to apply calculus to the
solution of problems in physics. Sort of one-sided education.”

This being the case, the task for educators, self-learners and parents
is simply put to reunite the two. And the world’s most creative people
tell us how in their own words and deeds; in their own explorations of
their own mind at work. What they find as individuals, when taken as a
whole, is a common set of thinking tools at the heart of creative
thinking/understanding. These tools include (bit are not necessarily
limited to)

* Observing
* Imaging
* Abstracting
* Recognizing Patterns
* Forming patterns
* Analogizing
* Body thinking
* Empathizing
* Dimensional thinking
* Modeling
* Playing
* Transforming 
* Synthesizing

*Observing*: Initially, all knowledge about the world is acquired through
observing, paying attention to what we seen, heard, touched, smelled,
tasted, or felt within the body.

*Imaging*: the ability to recall or imaging these feelings and sensations
is also an important tool.

*Abstracting*: Because sense experience and sense imagery are rich and
complex, creative people in all disciplines also use abstracting as an
essential tool. – The process of paring down complicated things to
simple principles is the same.

*Recognizing Patters*: It is involved in the discovery of nature’s law and
the structure of mathematics, but also the rhymes and rhythms of
language, dance, music and the formal intentions of the painter.
Recognizing patterns is also the first step toward creating new ones.

*Pattern forming* whether in music, art, engineering or dance almost
always begins with combining simple elements in unexpected ways.

*Analogizing*: The realization that two apparently different things share
important properties or functions lies in the heart of the world’s
greatest works of art and literature and the most enduring scientific
and engineering inventions.

*Body thinking*: Thinking that occurs through the sensations and awareness
of muscle, sinew, and skin. Well before they have found the words or the
formulas to express themselves, many creative people ‘feel’ ideas
emerging. Bodily sensations, muscular movements and emotions act as a
springboard for more formal thought.

*Empathizing*: It is related to body thinking. Many creative people
describe ‘losing’ themselves in the things they study, integrating ‘I’
and ‘it’.

*Dimensional thinking* is the imaginative ability to take thing mentally
from a flat plane into three dimensions ore more, from earth into outer
space, through time, even to alternate worlds. It is essential in
engineering, sculpture, visual art, medicine, mathematics and astronomy
– indeed in any activity that involves interpreting pictures, in one set
of dimensions as objects in another set.


One can learn and practice each of the above tools (first 9 out of 13)
somewhat independently of the others. The last four, however are clearly
high-order tools that integrate and rely upon the primary tools.

*Modeling* objects and concepts require some combination of dimensional
thinking, abstracting, analogizing and manipulative or body skill.

*Playing* is another integrative tool, build upon body thinking,
empathizing and play-acting and modeling

*Transforming* is the process of translating between one tool for thinking
and another and between imaginative tools and formal language of
communication.

*Synthesizing* completes the imagination’s tool key, for understanding is
always synthetic, combining many ways of experiencing.

There are 2 fundamentals components to the synthetic thinking. One is
synesthesia, a neurological and artistic term for experiencing
sensations in multiple ways at once. (E.g. a sound may provoke colors; a
taste may call up tactile sensations or memories..) . Synthesizing also
supposes an integration of knowledge in which observing, imaging, and
empathizing and the other tools all work together organically – not
serially as in transformational thinking, but simultaneously, such as
everything – memory knowledge, imagination, feeling is understood in a
holistic way.

We call this unified understanding linking mind and body, sense and
sensibility, - synosia – and it is the ultimate goal of tools-for
thinking education.


Each of the rest of the ## Chapters is dedicated to each of these 13
tools.

## Chapter 3 – Observing.

Many can recall a key moment when they learned he difference between
looking and seeing. (There are few visual examples shown in the book,
which show hidden view that cannot detect by just looking.)

Picasso says, “ I recall my father saying to me - I am quite willing for
you to become a painter, but you must not begin to paint until you are
able to draw well and that is very difficult”-. Then he gave me a
pigeon’s foot to practice on” . Having learned to observe one thing, he
had learned the keys to observing and describing everything.

Vincet van Gogh’s goal was to be able to draw in such a way that it goes
as easily as something writing down… to see in such a way that one can
reproduce at will what one sees on a larger or smaller scale.


However, simply looking, even patiently, is not sufficient. Part of
seeing as the camouflaged ptarmigan demonstrates knows what it look at
or for. It is kind of comparable to some people who , if they are given
a book in which some word occur only once, can flip through it and find
it.

An interesting story of observation – “A Manchester physician, while
teaching a ward class of students, took a sample of diabetic urine and
dipped a finger in it to taste it. He then asked all the students’ to
repeat his action. This they reluctantly did, making grimaces, but
agreeing that it tasted sweet. “I did this’ said the physician with
smile, ‘to teach you the importance of observing detail. If you had
watched me carefully you would have noticed that I put my first finger
in the urine, but licked my second finger’.
(from the book - the art of Scientific Investigation.)

Unlike other fruits, why Orange does not turn black on being damaged or
there is no color change when it got hurt? That was the observation done
by Biochemist Albert Szent-Gyorgy. The answer was that those plants
contained vitamin C, a sugar like compound that prevents oxygen from
oxidizing the polyphenols into brown or black protective compounds. You
can actually gauge the vitamin C content of different fruits fairly
accurately simply by noting which ones turn brown when damaged(e.g.
banana) and which do not (e.g. orange).

Harvard psychologist Rudolf Arnheim said in his 1969 book – Visual
thinking – “The cognitive operations called thinking are not the
privilege of mental process above and beyond perception but the
essential ingredients of perception itself”. As Herbert Read documented
in his classic – Education through art-“Part of the activity of art is
one of the exercise and an activity that keeps faculties lively whatever
the discipline touches on: the mind, the ear, whatever.

As with Sherlock Homes, “success rests with the powers of observation…”

Close one’s eyes and construct what is going on nearby through sound
alone. Listening TV without looking at it or watching it without sound
is also an educational experience in observing; all too often either the
visual aspect or the sound is irrelevant.

Collecting things, whether stamps, coins, insects,… is another excellent
way to improve visual observations.


## Chapter 4 – Imaging.


Numerous studies have found significant correlations between the
aptitude for visual imaging and career success in engineering.

Many examples listed in Brook Hindle’s famous book – Emulation and
invention.
Henry Petroski’s book – Invention by design.
Max Wertheimer – Productive thinking
Horace Barlow, Colin Blakemore & Miranda Weston-Smith – Images &
understanding

Beethoven says, “I carry my thoughts about with me for a long time,
often for a very long time, before writing them down…. I change many
things, discard others, and try again and again until I am satisfied;
then in my head, I begin to elaborate the work in its breadth, its
narrowness, its heights, its depth…. I hear and see the image in front
of me from every angle, as if it had been cast (like sculpture), and
only the labor of writing it down remains”.

Beethoven’s mastery of mental imagery surely explains how he was able to
compose some of his greatest music long after he had become profoundly
deaf.

At Kanton Schule attended by Einstein, students practice the ABCs of
visual thinking as rigorously as the ABC’s of language. The young
Einstein was thoroughly schooled in what modern scientists would call
‘thought experiments’’ seeing and feeling a physical situation almost
tangibly, manipulating its elements, observing their changes – all of
this imagined in the mind.

Professors of visual thinking at MIT & Stanford, suggests that any kind
of formal training in design, draftsmanship, drawing, painting or
photography can improve adult visualizing skills.

Aural imagining skills can clearly be learned by practicing. Listening
to poetry and literature read out loud can also improve imaging skills,
according to poet Amy Lowell. Perhaps this is one of the reasons that
reading to young children has been found to stimulate their
intelligence.

Good example on treating algebra problems geometrically and treating
geometrical problems algebraically.

Problem – A man rowing a boat when his hat falls into the river which is
flowing at 3 km per hour downstream. He is rowing upstream 2 km per hour
faster than the stream is taking him down. He discovers his hat is
missing on half-hour after it has fallen in the river. If he turns
around and rows back at the same speed relative to the river to fetch
his hat, how long will it take to catch up to it?

The algebraic approach to this problem is to abstract out the key
parameters in order to setup an equation and solve he for the unknown

Hat is dropped and moves at 3km /hr for 0.5 hour, so it travels 1.5km
downriver. With the same time (0.5 hour), man rows at 2km/hr and travels
1 km upriver. Hence man is 2.5km away from his hat when he discovers its
loss. He travels back to catch the hat. In order to travel 2km/hr
upriver, he had to be moving 5km/hr relative to the river; so if he rows
at the same rate downriver, his total velocity will be 5km/hr + 3km/hr
that river moves on or 8km/hr. The hat is still moving at 3km/hr. Let t
be the time necessary for the man to catch his hat. Then the time it
takes the man to catch his hat is (8km/hr)t= 2.5km+(3km/hr)t. Solving
the equation yields (8km/hr)t-(3km/hr)t=2.5km or t=.5hr.

The geometric approach to this problem is to visualize it.

Instead of imagining a man riding on a boat, as if it was a swiftly
moving train. Suppose you drop your hat as you are walking through one
of the cars in the same direction the train is travelling. You walk for
thirty seconds before you discover your hat is missing. You turn around
and walk for 30 sec before you discover your hat. How long will it take
if you walk back through the cars at the same constant speed? 30 sec.
The fact that the train or the river is moving with respects to the
ground outside turns out to be irreverent to the physical problem.
Treating the river as if it were a train and the man in the boast as if
he were walking on the river/train quickly yields 30 min to the solution
to our problem as before.

Although both provides same result, but have two separate approaches.
Einstein’s and Feynman’s conundrum was that they thought as
geometricians, but needed to communicate their results in analytical,,
algebraic form to satisfy the rigorous demands of physical proof. Only
few people can switch with ease between 2 approaches.


## Chapter 5 – Abstracting.

Although all abstractions are simplifications, the best abstractions are
likely Picasso’s Wilson’s and Cumming’s in that they yield new and often
multiple insights and meanings, using simplicity to reveal inobvious
properties and hidden connections.

Mark Twain and Earnest Hemmingway have written to their editors that
they regretted the extreme length of their manuscripts; if they had had
more time, the work has been half as long. Winston Churchill is supposed
to have said that he could talk for a day with 5 min of notice, but
needed a day to prepare if he had only 5 min in which to speak.

As physicist and inventor Mitchell Wilson wrote half-century ago “I’ll
tell you what you need to be a great scientist. You don’t have to be
able to understand very complicated things. It’s just opposite. You have
to be able to see what looks like the most complicated thing in the
world and in a flash, find the underlying simplicity. That’s what you
need; a talent for simplicity”.

Knowing what abstracting is and why it is important is half the problem.
The other half is learning how to find the simple concepts hiding among
complex expressions.

Picasso says, “To arrive at abstractions, it is always necessary to
begin with a concrete reality…You must start with something. Afterwards
you can remove all the traces of reality. It is what started the artist
off, excited his ideas and stirred his emotions (refer. Picasso’s Bull
series (Merrill Lynch’s icon?)

Learning how to abstract in one discipline provides the key to
understanding the abstractions of all disciplines.

## Chapter 6 – recognizing Patterns.

Recognizing patterns within the patterns has stimulated many artists.

“ A way of stimulating and arousing the mind to various inventions,”
Leonardo da Vinci advised himself and others to “ look at a wall spotted
with stains or with a mixture of different kinds of stones , if you have
to invent some scene, you may discover a similarity with different kinds
of landscapes, embellished with mountains, rivers rocks, trees, plants,
wide valley and hills in varied arrangement: or again you may see
variety of objects which you could reduce to complete and well drawn
forms.


The solution of much more complicated problems can sometimes be reduced
to similarly straight forward calculations. For example, what is the sum
of infinite series x=1+1/2+1/4+1/8+1/16….
This may looks complicated or even impossible, but with a bit of clever
manipulations, the problem is trivial. If x is as given above, x/2 will
be ½=<span
style="font-family:courier new;">1/4+1/8+1/16…<span
style="font-family:courier new;">
x-x/2= (1+1/2+1/4+1/8+1/16..) – (1/4+1/8+1/16…)
x-x/2 = 1 + (1/2-1/2)+(1/4-1/4)+(1/8-1/8)+(1/16-1/16)…
x-x/2=1; x=2.
Every even numbers can be described as sum of 2 prime numbers. That
pattern recognition by Goldbach is still not broken. All even numbers
known can be summed as 2 prime numbers.


Playing with jigsaw puzzle also exercise pattern recognition as does
puzzle making. Many eminent people in every field are puzzle addicts or
puzzle inventors.

## Chapter 7 – Forming Patterns.

Learning to create patterns is one of the keys to innovating in every
discipline and it is wise to learn this skill early on. You can do this
easily in writing by taking a very limited number of words and exploring
all the possible ways of making sense with them.

Similar exercise can be performed with kinesthetic and auditory patterns
and rhythms. People who have difficulty with the physical elaboration of
multiple contrasting patterns may find it easier to explore such
patterns graphically. As a starting point, we highly recommend, René
Paola’s Optical Art: theory and practice.

Looking through the history of almost any scientific field or studying
any scientific controversy will show that scientists always try many
ways of expressing their insights before some standardized textbook
formulation ossifies thinking in that area.

Making patterns for oneself is a lot more fun than memorizing – and lot
more valuable. Teasing apart one pattern and composing another require
real understanding of the basic elements of phenomenon and process.
More, it opens up whole new worlds of knowledge.


## Chapter 8 – Analogizing.

It is critical to understand the difference between analogy and
similarity. Analogies recognize a correspondence of inner relationship
or of function between two or more different phenomena or complex set of
phenomena. Similarities are resemblance between things based upon
observed characteristics such as color or form.

‘Her lips like berries” is an example for similarities, because
comparison is simply links the observed property of redness. A child or
poet compares a baseball to the sun might however make a valid analogy
based on the fact that each rises and falls though the sky in an arc.
Comparing orange to sweetness of life is also analogy.

The critical part of interesting analogies is that they reveal not mere
resemeblence but inapparent relationships between abstract functions,
one of which is understood, the other not.

How is possible to learn about things such as quantum mechanics or logic
or democracy or goodness in the first place? How can we learn about or
explain anything that we can’t directly, physically sense? And how it it
possible to apply knowledge learned in one content to another very
different one? How do we realize that musical resonance has some
applications to atoms or atomic resonance to medicine?

Without being identical, ideas can resonate too, just like the strings
of musical instruments or the electrons and nuclei of atoms.

Mental leaps: Analogy in creative thought, - a book on analogy. It
mentions many such examples from history in different fields. Even
Darwin’s theory of evolution is based on several analogies. Newton’s
theory of gravitation originated when he suddenly realized that the moon
like an apple dropping from a tree, must be falling.

Jacob Bronowski says, “The discoveries of science, the works of art are
explorations – more of explosion, of a hidden likeness”.

William Wordsworth wrote of “the pleasure the mind derives from the
perception of similitude in dissimilitude’.

Todd Siler greatly expands this approach, comparing the growth of our
minds to the growth of trees and onions. His book – Think like Genius-
provides dozens of exercise, some of which specifically develop and
metaphorical thinking.

## Chapter 9 – Body Thinking

This is about 6th sense. It is possible to conjure up feelings of body
tension or touch or movement in the mind, but most of us overlook these
imaginative feelings because we are trained so early to see them or
translate them into descriptive words.

Few books on this mentioned on this topic
Howard Gardner – Frame of mind
Vera Johns Steiner – Notebooks of mind

Surprisingly, musical feeling, physical sensations, manipulative skill,
and their mental imaging play an important role in scientific thinking
too which may be related to the fact that many eminent scientists are
also excellent artists or musicians.

Encyclopedia Britannica defines mime as the first and only truly
universal language.

Like the other types of thinking discussed, body thinking combines
objective and subjective ways of knowing. Body thinking exercise can
also be made an explicit part of disciplinary and transdisciplinary
studies.

When children play out choreography of movements representing
fundamental elements f narrative, they remember it better. Additionally
students can be encouraged to pay attention to their bodily feelings
when a class problem does not make sense and use this discomfort as the
basis for asking questions. Sensitive teachers can teach them it
identify and work with these feelings by reading postures and facial
expressions, just as we read a mime.

Sort of kinesthetic explorers

With practice, we may all expand our imagination with the sensations of
movement, tension and touch that we experience, imitate model and
project.

“I hear and I forget. I see and I remember. I do and I understand”, says
a Chinese proverb.

Doing and remembering how it feels to have done is inseparable from
learning to think with the body. So don’t just sit there. Monkey around
and just might find yourself solving problem only your body knows how to
answer.

## Chapter 10 – Empathizing.

Willa Cather once wrote that novelists, actors and physicians have the
‘unique and marvelous of entering into the very skin of another human
being’.

Cather continues to say , “ You must enter into the person you are
describing into his very skin and see the world through his eye ad feel
it through his senses”.

C.P.E. Bach argues, “ A musician cannot move others unless he too is
moved. He must feel all the emotions that he hopes to arouse in his
audience, for the revealing of his own humor will stimulate a like mood
in the listener.”

Empathizing is “key skill for the practice of any helping
relationship’.

Many creative individuals argue that theatrical experience encourages
and promotes the empathic imagination.

Practice “inner attention which centers on things we see, hear, touch
and feel” in real and imaginary circumstances. This means observing your
own responses to the world and also remembering physical and emotional
memories of your responses.

Practice “ external attention” to people and things outside yourself.
Imagine what the object of your external attention is sensing and
feeling get close to it.

Emulation is always a useful way to empathize. This is certainly the
educational approach used by PBS TV program ‘ Kratt’s Creatures’.

All of these examples show us that understanding is most complete when
you are not you but the things you wish to understand. In fact, when it
comes to empathizing, the whole world is a stage for the imagination.

## Chapter 11 – Dimensional Thinking.

Dimensional thinking involve moving from 2-D to 3-D and vice versa.;
mapping or transforming information provided in one set of dimensions to
another set; scaling or alerting the proportions of an object or process
within one set of dimensions and conceptualizing dimensions beyond space
and time as know of them.

Another aspect of moving from plans to reality involves the dimensional
skill of scaling. Philip and Phylis Morrison and the office of Charles
and Ray Eames produced a wonderful movie and book called ‘Powers of Ten’
that provides a useful scale running from smallest to largest.

Scale and time certainly matter. Massive buildings connote power; small
rooms connote intimacy and privacy. A six inch model of Eiffel tower has
none of the impact of the original. Some things has to be seen in the
acute angle, to see it understand it. (Writing SHORT in a paper and
writing the same word, covering the entire A4 sheet will have different
experience for a reader. However, if the reader see it from a long
distance, the word that written in very large size can be seen, but not
the word written in normal size.

Einstein showed that the passage of time or what is sometimes called as
4th dimension is not absolute but relative to observer and observed. All
of us have experience by looking at the clock and wondering where the
time went (too fast). We have been so bored that every second is like a
minute and every minute is like an hour. When we mediate, time seems not
to exist at all. Physical time, physiological time, mental time appear
to be different; perhaps there are dimensions of time as unexpected and
surprising as fractal dimensions in space.
Is a month the same to one-year old who experiences that unit of time as
one twelfth of his life as it is it to centenarian for whom it is a mere
one one-hundred-twentieth? Is time, then a single dimension or set of
dimensions?


Granted the need for dimensional thinking skills, not only in science
but in arts, engineering, manufacturing and daily life, how might they
be taught?

One method is to play with geometric shaped and connect them to objects
in real world.
Reid one of consummate mathematics popularizes of this century, outlined
one approach in her 1963 book, ‘A long way from Euclid’ which she used
with high school teachers and education students. Reid goes on to show
that although we can see only shadows of our hypercube, we can still
know its properties by extrapolating. A point has no angles, edges, or
faces and one vertex (the point itself). A line segment has no angles,
no faces, one-edge (1-D form) and two vertices (points at the end of the
segment). A square has 4 vertices (points) , 4 edges(1-D form), 4
angles, and a single face (2-D form). A cube has 8 vertices and angles,
12 edges (1-D forms), 6 faces (2-D form), one 3-D form. As dimensions
increases, the number of vertices increases; one, two four, eight. As
dimensions increases, the number of angles increases from 0 to 0 to 4 to
8. If we want to extrapolate further, we could even describe the
characteristics of a 5-D or a 6-D without even being able to visualize.
Such is the power of dimensional imagination.

## Chapter 12 – Modeling.

Models can be smaller than life-size or bigger; physical or
mathematical; realistic or not; depending on their intended uses. In
almost all cases, the point of modeling is to make accessible something
that is difficult to experience easily.

Modeling requires and therefore teaches many imaginative skills. Models
can be formulated only after a real system or situation has been
intensively observed, simplified by abstracting critical features,
rescaled for human manipulation and embodied physically or expressed in
some verbal, mathematical or artistic form.

Perhaps the most important thing that modeling does is to provide the
modeler with complete control of a situation, object or idea – or,
conversely to reveal explicitly where control or understanding is
lacking. As Picasso said, “To model an object is to possess it.”


The earlier a student learns that every equation has its physical
manifestation and every physical phenomenon its mathematical model, the
better equipped he or she is to be inventive. Visual thinking can also
be improved by modeling, because there is a direct connection between
the kinesthetic sense and vision.

Develop spatial skill by modeling your school, house or neighborhood.
Because it requires figuring out how things work, modeling is a great
way to learn, no matter your age. Make modeling is a lifelong habit and
you hold a key to a lifetime of fun and learning.

## Chapter 13 – Playing

Considering the sheer joy of fooling around, not to mention its
potential rewards, it is not surprising that many scientists have
galumphed with their subjects.

Playing with distinctions, boundaries, unassailable truths and the
limits of utility is in fact what many of the most innovative people in
all disciplines do. When the rules of grammar are systematically broken,
logic overturned or perceptions puzzled, we know that a ‘game’s afoot’
and something interesting will happen. No better examples exist than in
the topsy-turvy worlds of those masters of play, Edward Lear, Lewis
Carroll and M.C. Escher.

Wordplay and inventions came naturally to Lear and his ‘boshblobberbosh
(meaning particularly foolish foolishness) was well enough appreciated
to make his book of ‘Nonsense and Laughable Lyrics’ enduring
bestsellers. One reason that does this book have appealed to generations
of children and adults alike is that they break all boundaries of word
to use, exploring connotations, combinations and sounds as few have done
before or since.

Lewis played a nonsense poems and whimsical stories for children at
photography and at logical games and puzzles that reached the heights in
‘Alice in the wonderland’.

Lear’s verbal nonsense, Carroll’s logical conundrums, Escher’s
perceptual puzzles and Penrose’s periodic tiling challenges our
conceptions of nature and reality. But as play of the most creative art,
they do more than that. The games they invented have practical
applications.

There is more to the study of piano or violin than just reproducing the
tons and more to making music than musical conventions or contemporary
taste might suggest. Play with patterns of all kinds can improve skills
in composition and improvisation.

Reference to the ‘Oxford Guide to World Games’ shows that amusements
come in a huge variety; perhaps the most popular is the making of
anagrams – taking a word and seeing how many other words can be made
from its letters: OWN, NOW, WON.. It is also possible to form words that
read same forward and backwards as a mirror image without turning the
word upside down. These are called plaindromes: NOON, DAD, BOB.
“Madam. I’m Adam’’, “ Tis Ivan, on a visit” areplaindromic sentences.
Most of these words games have direct analogues in music.

Word games, board games, musical games, visual games, puzzles, toys and
almost any other intellectual amusement imaginable all develop some
skill, knowledge or concept that can be turned to good account and often
in more than one discipline or endeavor.
So play!


## Chapter 14 – Transforming

We call the serial or simultaneous use of multiple imaginative tools in
such a way that one (set of) tool(s) acts upon another (set)
transforming or transformational thinking.

Take a look at any creative endeavor and you will invariably find ideas
and insights transformed through many tools for thinking and translated
into one or more expressive languages. Most creative people handle
complex transformational thinking with ease.

Sir Francis Galton, one of the founders of modern psychology, documented
in his classic ‘Inquiries and Human Faculty and Its Development (1883)’
that mnemonic devices are extremely common. “Persons who are imaginative
almost invariably think of numerals in some form of visual imagery’.

Sometimes people collaborate on a mnemonic transformation that
integrates concepts from many disciplines. For centuries, students of
music & poetry in India have memorized a nonsense word in order to learn
and remember all of the basic patters of sound rhythm The word is
‘yamatarajabhanasalagam’ which when written according to its spoken
rhythm of stresses look like this: yaMATARAjaBHAnasalaGAM. George Perle
has explained it, “There is a lot in those 10 syllables. As you
pronounce the word you weep out all possible triplets of short and long
beats. The first syllables, ya MA TA have the rhythm short, long, long.
The second through the fourth are MA TA RA: long, long, long. The you
have TA RA ja: long, long, short. Next there is RA ja BHA: long, short,
long. And so on.” Thus a simple word, when pronounced properly condenses
a huge amount of pattern information that can be applied to many of the
arts.


Perle’s friend Sherman Stein (mathematician) , took the transformation
another step. He pointed out that the basic pattern in the Indian word
is digital. By assigning ‘0’ for short and ‘1’ for long, the word will
become ‘0111010001’ (=465 in decimal). Since there are 10 digits in the
number, the number may be turned into a physical mneme with the thumb
and little finger of the left hand bent and the three middle fingers of
the right hand bent. The bend digits represent ‘0’ and unbend, ‘1’. All
of these mnemes are logically equivalent to the original Hindu word.

Significantly the digital numerical sequence presents possibilities that
the original Hindu word does not. Imagine, Stein suggests, a kinetic
analogy in which this string of numbers is a snake that grabs itself by
the tail. Visualizing this “snake” that the first 01 (its ‘mouth’) will
overlap the last 01 (its tail) and a continuous circle of numbers will
be formed. Although the number sequence has now lost 2 digits, the
circle still has all of the possible combinations of three pairs of
elements – whether they are musical beats, syllabic accents in words,
numbers, the result or flipping three pennies ways of grouping three
people of either sex or a great many other things. This numerical snake
is therefore the most concise description of such information that is
possible. Notably it has the same pattern as entities known to
mathematicians since the 1880s as ‘memory wheel’ which can store all the
possible parts of things, triplets of things, quadruplets things and so
on, in the most condensed form. The power of transformational thinking
is that it can reveal meta-patterns connecting music, genes, telegraphy,
poetry and math or any other set of disciplines.

A Yale political science professor Edward Tufte has pointed out in a
series of stunningly beautiful books, including ‘The Visual Display of
Quantitative Information (1983) and ‘Envisioning Information (1990),
data in every field are converted into graphs and visual images of one
sort or another.

Ears can observe complexity that eyes cannot. Eyes can follow only a
single line, one pattern at a time. When we listen to a musical
ensemble, however, we hear each individual instrument even as we hear
the harmony that results from their interaction.

Many universities are experiencing with transformations with complex
databases – for instances economic indicators – into a music that allows
analysts to hear the synthetic patterns while simultaneously following
individual trends.

The point is that different transformations of an idea or a set of data
will have different characteristics and uses. The more unexpected the
transformation, the greater the likelihood that a surprising insight
will result.

The 3 notations that are generally used today are Labanotation invented
by Rudolf Laban in 1928, Benseh Movement Notation by Rudolf Benesh and
his dancer wife Joan in 1955. & Eshkol-Wachmann Notation (1958)

Rebuses, representations of words by pictures, sounds, or symbols are
perhaps the most developed type of puzzle that builds word-number-image
transforming skills. When we become aware of the transformations our
ideas undergo, we are well on the road to an awareness of creative
imagining as a process we can play with and control.


## Chapter 15 – Synthesizing.

The inevitable result of transformational thinking is synthetic
understanding, in which sensory impressions, feelings, knowledge, and
memories ocme together in a multimodal, unified way. Vladimir Nabokove
wrote in his extraordinary memoir “Speak, Memory (1947). “I may be
inordinately fond of my earliest impressions, but then I have reasons to
be grateful to them., They led the way to a veritable Eden of visual and
tactile sensations.”

Associational synesthesia occurs in about half of all young children and
from 5 to 15 % of adult’s population. The huge difference between
children and adults suggests that the typical educational focus on
unisensory experiences and express stifles an early and natural
association of perceptions. “Synesthetic perception is the rule” says
the French philosopher Maurice Merleau-Ponty.

If thinking is naturally synesthetic, it should be possible to maintain
and develop associational synesthetic with practice. Philosopher Steve
Odin points to Japan where artists and philosophers have long considered
synesthesia to be the highest form of aesthetic experience and where it
is explicitly cultivated. The green tea represents the living things of
nature and drinking it infuses the celebrant with the aroma, taste,
color and feel of this nature. Every sensation is orchestrated to
produce a oneness. “ True practice of tea brings all senses to function
simultaneously and in accord.

Poet-artist e.e. Cummings made copious notes on analogies between arts ,
translating many “ an image of one of the sense in terms of another of
the sense.” As he did in the last lines of

“Somewhere I have never travelled” ,
“ the voice of your eyes is deeper than all roses
Nobody not even the rain, has such small hands”

Synosia is the natural and necessary result of imaging, analogizing,
modeling, playing and transforming. Creative people have always combined
many ways of feeling and knowing simultaneously, often describing in
detail personal “tea ceremony’, equivalents melding, sensual and
intellectual concerns.

Artist Otto Piene felt strongly that “mind, which is really body and
body which really exists in the mind, do not wish to allow us to treat
them as separate entities… The man who uses his body to enclose his mind
and his mind to lift up his body lives this timeless moment, this
heavenly reality, in order to stride free through space, this man has
paradise within him.”

George Bellows agreed, “The ideal artist is he who knows everything,
feels everything, experiences everything and retains his experience in a
spirit of wonder and feeds upon it with creative lust… he uses every
possible power, spirit, emotion, conscious or unconscious, to arrive at
his ends.”

Aaron Copland felt, an individual must be aware of simultaneously on
three planes. “(1) the sensuous plane, (2) the expressive plane
(emotional) plane.

The need for a synesthetic and synosic education is best summarized by
the simple image of printed circuit board (PCB), one of the most telling
‘cosmic synchronizations” of modern times. The image of PCB is a piece
of art, although it looks like one. Or rather it is a piece of art, but
only unintentionally. It is a pattern, a series of visually designed
logical relationship, mathematical calculations. That it has the form of
art work, not by chance. Electronic chips made by a process derived from
the technique of etching and silk-screen printing and adapted to coating
silicon components with copper and gold. Chips are literally designed as
patterns on huge piece of paper, photographically reduced and made into
the masks used to etch or to plate material onto silicon wafers.

This is where the course of civilization taken us. Logic is an image
that must be printed, just like an art print. The purpose and materials
may be different, but the links between art and science and technology
are as strong today as they were in Renaissance. To comprehend the
advances of this century, one must be able to perceive the connections
between mathematical calculations, logical constructions, patterns,
visual images and the technical process of manipulating artistic media
to produce electronic inventions or to make similarly unexpected
concatenations of thinking tools. Only those who became excited by such
inspirations will have the desire to create the next synthesis.

The future will therefore depend upon our ability to create synthetic
understanding by integrating all ways of knowing. In Buckminster
Fuller’s essay, “Emergent Humanity” he warned that in evolution
“overspecialization leads to extinction. We need the
philosopher-scientist-artist-the comprehensivist, not merely more deluxe
quality technician mechanics.

With so many eminent people in so many different disciplines proclaiming
the same need, it is incumbent that we listen. Synosia is not an ideal
or a dream; it is a necessity.

## Chapter 16 – Synthesizing Education.

A synthetic education requires that we change how we teach , bearing
eight basic goals in mind.

We must emphasize the teaching of universal process of invention in
addition to the acquisition of disciplinary products of knowledge. The
purpose of education should be understanding rather than simply knowing.
It follows that we must teach the intuitive and imaginative skills
necessary to inventive process. As shown, creative thinking in every
field begins in nonlogical, nonverbal forms. To think, is to feel and to
feel, is to think.

We must implement a multidisciplinary education that places the arts on
an equal footing with the science. Arts and science constantly interact
in very fruitful ways that are often overlooked.
We must integrate the curriculum by using a common descriptive language
for innovation. There is no point in teaching a liberal arts and
sciences curriculum that continues to fragment knowledge and creates
specialists who cannot communicate across disciplinary lines.
We must emphasize the trans-disciplinary lessons of disciplinary
learning. An education that trains the mind to imagine creativity in one
filed prepares the mind for creative application in any other, for
thinking tools as well as flexible knowledge are transferable.

We must use the experiences of people who have successfully bridged
disciplines as exemplars of creative activity within our curricula. The
best way to learn is to watch others and then model their technique,
insights and process.

To reach the widest range of minds, ideas in every discipline should be
presented in many forms. There is no one single imaginative skill or
creative technique that is adequate for all thinking people. We must
forge a pioneering education, whose purpose is to produce the
imaginative generalities who can take us into the uncharted future.
Every novel idea takes us into new territory and creative people are, by
necessity pioneers.

We need polymaths (Greek word means ‘to know much or very knowing’) and
pioneers who know that imagination thrives when sensual experience joins
with reasons, when illusions link to reality, when intuition couples
with intellect, when the passions of the heart unite with those of the
mind, when knowledge gained in one discipline opens the doors to all the
rest.

“Everything in your life ends up in your act”, says Aaron Freeman.

The wider your range of knowledge and feeling, the greater your range of
imaginative possibilities and the more synthetic and important your work
will be.