---
layout: post
title: gpucc; an open-source GPGPU compiler
date: 2016-04-07
categories: [computer science]
tags: [machine learning]

---

# gpucc: an open-source GPGPU compiler

## Abstract

Graphics Processing Units have emerged as powerful accelerators for massively parallel, numerically intensive workloads. The two dominant software models for these devices are NVIDIA’s CUDA and the cross-platform OpenCL standard. Until now, there has not been a fully open-source compiler targeting the CUDA environment, hampering general compiler and architecture research and making deployment difficult in datacenter or supercomputer environments. 

In this paper, we present gpucc, an *LLVM-based*, fully open-source, CUDA compatible compiler for high performance computing. It performs various general and CUDA-specific optimizations to generate high performance code. The Clang-based frontend supports modern language features such as those in C++11 and C++14. Compile time is 8% faster than NVIDIA’s toolchain (nvcc) and it reduces compile time by up to 2.4x for pathological compilations (>100 secs), which tend to dominate build times in parallel build environments. Compared to nvcc, gpucc’s runtime performance is on par for several open-source benchmarks, such as Rodinia (0.8% faster), SHOC (0.5% slower), or Tensor (3.7% faster). It outperforms nvcc on internal large-scale end-to-end benchmarks by up to 51.0%, with a geometric mean of 22.9%.

<iframe width="600" height="400" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/JHfb8z-iSYk" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>


## References


* Jingyue Wu, Artem Belevich, Eli Bendersky, Mark Heffernan, Chris Leary, Jacques Pienaar, Bjarke Roune, Rob Springer, Xuetian Weng, Robert Hundt, [*gpucc: an open-source GPGPU compiler*](http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2854041), CGO 2016, Proceedings of the 2016 International Symposium on Code Generation and Optimization, Google, USA.
 
