---
layout: post
title: SLAC Dataset From MIT and Facebook
date: 2018-02-12
categories: [computer science]
tags: [machine learning]

---


# SLAC: A Sparsely Labeled Dataset for Action Classification and Localization

Hang Zhao, Zhicheng Yan, Heng Wang, Lorenzo Torresani, Antonio Torralba

## Abstract

This paper describes a procedure for the creation of large-scale video datasets for action classification and localization from unconstrained, realistic web data. The scalability of the proposed procedure is demonstrated by building a novel video benchmark, named **SLAC** (*Sparsely Labeled ACtions*), consisting of over 520K untrimmed videos and 1.75M clip annotations spanning 200 action categories. Using our proposed framework, annotating a clip takes merely 8.8 seconds on average. This represents a **saving in labeling time** of over 95% compared to the traditional procedure of manual trimming and localization of actions. Our approach dramatically reduces the amount of human labeling by *automatically identifying hard clips*, i.e., clips that contain coherent actions but lead to prediction disagreement between action classifiers. A human annotator can disambiguate whether such a clip truly contains the hypothesized action in a handful of seconds, thus generating labels for highly informative samples at little cost. We show that our large-scale dataset can be used to effectively pre-train action recognition models, significantly improving final metrics on smaller-scale benchmarks after fine-tuning. On Kinetics, UCF-101 and HMDB-51, models pre-trained on SLAC outperform baselines trained from scratch, by 2.0%, 20.1% and 35.4% in top-1 accuracy, respectively when RGB input is used. Furthermore, we introduce a simple procedure that leverages the sparse labels in SLAC to pre-train action localization models. On THUMOS14 and ActivityNet-v1.3, our localization model improves the mAP of baseline model by 8.6% and 2.5%, respectively. 


<iframe width="600" height="400" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/pAiiPNg0kDE" frameborder="0" allow="autoplay; encrypted-media" allowfullscreen></iframe>


The paper "SLAC: A Sparsely Labeled Dataset for Action Classification and Localization" is available here:

[http://slac.csail.mit.edu/](http://slac.csail.mit.edu/)