---
layout: post
title: Research Proposal
date: 2020-09-24
categories: [computer science]
tags: [machine learning]

---

### Article Source
* [Thesis Proposal](https://www.cs.columbia.edu/education/phd/requirements/proposal/)

----

# Thesis Proposal

Purpose
-------

In the thesis proposal, the PhD or DES student lays out an intended
course of research for the dissertation.  By accepting the thesis
proposal, the student's dissertation proposal committee agrees that the
proposal is *practicable* and *acceptable*, that its plan and prospectus are
satisfactory, and that the candidate is competent in the knowledge and
techniques required, and formally recommends that the candidate proceed
according to the prospectus and under the supervision of the
dissertation committee. It is part of the training of the student's
research apprenticeship that the form of this proposal must be as
*concise* as those proposals required by major funding agencies.

Commitiee
---------

The student proposes to a committee consisting of the student's advisor
and two other researchers who meet
[requirements](http://gsas.columbia.edu/content/nomination-and-appointment-defense-committee)
for dissertation committee membership.  The advisor should solicit the
prospective committee members, not the student. In cases where the
research and departmental advisors are
[different](http://www.cs.columbia.edu/education/phd/requirements/advising),
both must serve on the committee.

Document
---------------------

The student prepares a *proposal document* that consists of a core, plus
any optional appendices. The core is limited to **30 pages** (e.g., 12 point
font, single spacing, 1 inch margins all around), and should contain
sections describing **1) the problem and its background, 2) the innovative
claims of the proposed work and its relation to existing work, 3) a
description of at least one initial result that is mature enough to be
able to be written up for submission to a conference, and 4) a plan for
completion of the research**. The committee commits to read and respond to
the core, but reserves the right to refuse a document whose core exceeds
the page limit. The student cannot assume that the committee will read
or respond to any additional appendices.

The complete doctoral thesis proposal document must be disseminated to
the entire dissertation committee **no later than two weeks (14 days)**
prior to the proposal presentation. The Doctoral Program Administrator
must be informed of the scheduling of the proposal presentation no later
than two weeks (14 days) prior to the presentation. Emergency exceptions
to either of these deadlines can be granted by the Director of Graduate
Studies or the Department Chair on appeal by the advisor and agreement
of the committee.

A latex thesis proposal template is available
[here](http://mice.cs.columbia.edu/c/d.php?d=43).

Presentation and Feedback
-------------------------

The student presents the proposal in a **prepared talk of 45 minutes** to
the committee, and responds to any questions and feedback by the
committee.

Timing
------

The student's advisor, upon approval of the full faculty, establishes
the target semester by which the thesis proposal must be successfully
completed. The target semester must be no later than the **eighth
semester**, and *the student must be informed of the target semester no
later than the sixth semester*.

Progress
--------

Passing or failing is determined by consensus of the committee, who then
sign the [dissertation proposal
form](http://gsas.columbia.edu/sites/default/files/GSAS-proposal.pdf).
Failure to pass the thesis proposal by the end of the target semester or
the eighth semester, whichever comes first, is deemed unsatisfactory
progress: the PhD or DES student is normally placed on probation and can
be immediately dismissed from the program. However, on appeal of the
student's advisor, one semester's grace can be granted by the full
faculty.