---
layout: post
title: Banach Space Representer Theorems for Neural Networks
date: 2021-06-28
categories: [computer science]
tags: [machine learning, graph mining]

---

### Article Source

* [Banach Space Representer Theorems for Neural Networks](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nLlIUeOqIcs)


---

## Banach Space Representer Theorems for Neural Networks

* Prof. Robert D. Nowak, University of Wisconsin-Madison

## Abstract

This talk presents a *variational framework* to understand the properties of functions learned by neural networks fit to data. The framework is based on total variation semi-norms defined in the Radon domain, which is naturally suited to the analysis of neural activation functions (ridge functions). Finding a function that fits a dataset while having a small semi-norm is posed as an infinite dimensional variational optimization.  We derive a representer theorem showing that finite-width neural networks are solutions to the variational problem. The representer theorem is reminiscent of the classical reproducing *kernel Hilbert space representer theorem*, but we show that neural networks are solutions in a non-Hilbertian Banach space. While the learning problems are posed in an infinite dimensional function space, similar to *kernel methods*, they can be recast as finite-dimensional neural network training problems. These neural network training problems have regularizers which are related to the well-known *weight decay* and *path-norm regularizers*. Thus, the results provide new insight into functional characteristics of overparameterized neural networks and also into the design neural network regularizers.  Our results also provide new theoretical support for a number of empirical findings in deep learning architectures including the benefits of **skip connections**, sparsity, and low-rank structures.

This is joint work with Rahul Parhi.


<iframe width="600" height="400" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/nLlIUeOqIcs" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

 