---
layout: post
title: How computer science can help fight COVID-19
date: 2021-01-22
categories: [computer science]
tags: [machine learning, data management]

---

### Article Source
* [How computer science can help fight COVID-19](https://news.uchicago.edu/story/how-computer-science-can-help-fight-covid-19)

----


# How computer science can help fight COVID-19

### UChicago researchers launch projects exploring health disparities, machine learning

The COVID-19 pandemic has mobilized the world's scientific community
like no other recent crisis, including many researchers using the most
modern data science and artificial intelligence approaches. At the
University of Chicago, public health experts, computer scientists,
economists and policy analysts have launched projects using
computational tools to better detect, diagnose, treat and prevent the
spread of the deadly virus.

This summer, three of these projects received seed funding from the
[C3.ai Digital Transformation Institute (DTI)](http://c3dti.ai), a new
partnership of technology companies and universities committed to
accelerating the benefits of artificial intelligence for business,
government and society. The research attacks the pandemic from several
angles: helping policymakers control disease spread by identifying and
addressing key social factors, physicians detect the disease at earlier
stages, and hospitals decide which patients require admission. A fourth
project, [a collaboration led by UChicago Medicine's Maryellen
Giger](https://news.uchicago.edu/story/researchers-develop-ai-help-diagnose-understand-covid-19-lung-images),
was funded by the organization in spring.

The awards were part of \$5.4 million in funding distributed by DTI,
after their [inaugural call for
proposals](https://news.uchicago.edu/story/uchicago-joins-new-academicindustry-consortium-accelerate-ai-innovation)
in March. The group also provides AI software tools and a "data lake" of
COVID-19 datasets to aid researchers studying the pandemic.

"The enthusiastic response among scientists and researchers coupled with
the diverse, high-quality and compelling proposals we've received
suggests that we have the potential to alter the course of this global
pandemic," said Thomas M. Siebel, CEO of C3.ai. "In the face of this
crisis, the Institute is proud to bring together the best and brightest
minds and provide direction and leadership to support objective analysis
and AI-based, data-driven science to mitigate COVID-19."

### Modeling health disparities

The early toll of the COVID-19 pandemic revealed severe health
inequities in who catches the disease and who suffers death and
morbidity. Latin and African Americans are more than three times as
likely to catch the virus and twice as likely to die as white Americans,
[according to CDC
data](https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/07/05/us/coronavirus-latinos-african-americans-cdc-data.html).
Many experts believe this disparity goes beyond medical comorbidities,
to social determinants such as housing, jobs and neighborhood features.

[Anna
Hotton](http://med-faculty.bsd.uchicago.edu/Default/Details/16813), a
research assistant professor at UChicago Medicine, previously studied
the relationship between social factors and viral spread in the context
of other infectious diseases. With her DTI grant, she's working with
fellow UChicago researchers [Aditya
Khanna](http://home.uchicago.edu/khanna7/about.html), [Harold
Pollack](https://ssa.uchicago.edu/ssascholars/h-pollack) and [John
Schneider](https://pbhs.uchicago.edu/program/faculty/john-schneider) to
adapt that work to COVID-19, with help from agent-based modeling experts
[Jonathan Ozik](https://www.anl.gov/profile/jonathan-ozik) and [Charles
Macal](https://www.anl.gov/profile/charles-m-macal) at Argonne National
Laboratory.

"A lot of my substantive work focuses around understanding social and
structural factors as they impact HIV transmission," Hotton said. "With
COVID-19, there are a lot of similarities in terms of the social factors
that shape people's vulnerability to infection, and I'm motivated to
shed light on some of these social issues and help guide work around
reducing health inequities."

Agent-based modeling is a powerful form of computer simulation for
studying complex systems, from molecular interactions to traffic
congestion. Over the last decade, Argonne researchers Ozik and Macal
have gradually assembled a computer model for the entire city of Chicago
and its population, using it to observe and predict the spread of
diseases both real (MRSA, influenza) and imagined ([a zombie
outbreak](https://www.chicagotribune.com/business/blue-sky/ct-argonne-zombie-takeover-argonne-bsi-20161031-story.html)).
Recently, the team has [focused their ChiSIM model on the spread of
COVID](https://www.anl.gov/article/argonnes-researchers-and-facilities-playing-a-key-role-in-the-fight-against-covid19?utm_source=Argonne+Internal+List&utm_campaign=d34b8b7d6f-Snapshot_2020_03_30&utm_medium=email&utm_term=0_91cdd2aa04-d34b8b7d6f-237434281)-19,
looking for types of buildings and areas of the city where people gather
and disease transmission risk is high.

With Hotton and her collaborators, Ozik and Macal are working on adding
new data to their synthetic Chicago population of 2.7 million "agents,"
including information on housing, occupations and other social
determinants that likely influence virus spread. The team will also use
machine learning to identify the data elements that are most important
to include in the model from a long list of options, such as time spent
on public transit, ability to work from home, number of family members
in a household, and many other details.

Once enriched with this data, the researchers will be able to better
simulate various scenarios of disease spread and virtually test how
different public health or social policy strategies can help mitigate
the disease. Their results will be shared with partners in the Chicago
and Illinois Departments of Public Health, advising these agencies on
how best to deploy testing, reopening of businesses and schools, and,
eventually, vaccination.

"Agent-based modeling allows us to explore intervention approaches in a
virtual environment before rolling out interventions in real life, in
addition to making predictions about trends in incidence and mortality,"
Hotton said. "Later, when vaccines are available, we'll need to figure
out how to deploy them most efficiently to the populations with greatest
need."

### Admit or release?

One of the toughest decisions physicians face during the pandemic is
deciding which COVID-19 patients to keep in the hospital, and which are
safe to recover at home. In the face of overwhelmed hospital capacity
and a brand-new disease with little data-based evidence for diagnosis
and treatment, old rubrics for deciding which patients to admit have
proven ineffective. But machine learning could help make the right
decision earlier, saving lives and lowering health care costs.

A team led by Prof. [Sendhil
Mullainathan](https://www.chicagobooth.edu/faculty/directory/m/sendhil-mullainathan)
of Chicago Booth will work with a large northwest U.S. hospital network
on creating a new model for predicting acute respiratory distress
syndrome (ARDS), the most severe symptom and primary cause of death for
COVID-19 patients. Using over 4 million chest X-rays, the team---which
also includes [Aleksander Madry](https://people.csail.mit.edu/madry/) of
Massachusetts Institute of Technology and [Ziad
Obermeyer](https://publichealth.berkeley.edu/people/ziad-obermeyer/)
from University of California, Berkeley---will build a new machine
learning model that predicts the likelihood of this pulmonary collapse.

To work around the issue of limited COVID-19 data early in the pandemic,
the team will feed their model with X-rays from other conditions that
affect the lungs, such as influenza and pneumonia.

"No one has enough data on COVID yet to apply the modern machine
learning toolkit," said Obermeyer. "But in a pulmonary infection such as
COVID, the lungs actually have a very limited physiological playbook.
When the lungs are attacked by a virus or bacterium, they basically only
react in one way. Our hypothesis is that we can learn about
deterioration in COVID by looking at deterioration in other conditions."

Once validated, their AI model will be made open source and available to
other health systems around the world. The project also allows
Mullainathan and Obermeyer an opportunity to develop a medical
decision-making algorithm that controls for the bias they identified in
other health care software in [previous
research](https://news.uchicago.edu/story/health-care-prediction-algorithm-biased-against-black-patients-study-finds).

"Even if you're using objective biological data like X-rays, your
outcomes are biased because they're produced by a health system that is
biased," Obermeyer said. "The optimistic view of our prior work on
racial bias is that once you're aware of those biases, you can make
algorithms that take them into account."

### Early detection: Treating a pandemic like engine failure

In the early stages of a disease outbreak, detecting cases is critical
to prevent population spread, but also very difficult---a proverbial
"needle in the haystack" data problem. But computer scientists have
already developed artificial intelligence systems for such challenges in
other contexts, such as detecting mechanical faults in jet engines or
anomalous and potentially fraudulent financial transactions. Models
built for these applications must be able to accurately and reliably
find rare occurrences in a flood of data---nobody wants to discover
airplane engine failure too late.

In previous work at Caltech, UChicago computer scientist [Yuxin
Chen](https://cs.uchicago.edu/people/profile/yuxin-chen1/) built these
early detection systems for mechanical engineers and other domain
experts. With DTI funding, he'll work with researchers from UC Berkeley
and UCSF on transferring these approaches to detecting infection from
COVID and other diseases using medical and public health surveillance
data. The team will adapt solutions for common challenges such as
training models on sparse data, combining data from different sources
and collection techniques, and minimizing false negatives that could
have dire consequences if infected patients are missed.

Chen's portion of the project focuses on his primary research interest:
[interactive machine
learning](https://cs.uchicago.edu/news/article/yuxin-chen-profile/). As
opposed to the passive, "black box" of most AI models, these systems
actively work with human experts, suggesting new data sources that
should be gathered to improve predictions, or asking for help when a
particular diagnosis is unclear.

"If the model is not very confident about the predictive results for a
certain medical diagnosis that we have data on, it will flag these data
and ask experts to verify or correct the predictive results," said Chen,
an assistant professor. "We also care about interpretable
recommendations; we\'re training our AI system to effectively
communicate with the human users to collaboratively make detection and
diagnosis decisions. So we need to build an interpretable interface that
sits between the system and medical professionals in order to make the
collaboration seamless."

