---
layout: post
title: PPRGo-Scaling Graph Neural Networks with Approximate PageRank
date: 2021-06-24
categories: [computer science]
tags: [machine learning, graph mining]

---

### Article Source

* [PPRGo: Scaling Graph Neural Networks with Approximate PageRank](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AlOrhX3Rx0Y)


---

# PPRGo: Scaling Graph Neural Networks with Approximate PageRank

* This is the teaser video for our KDD2020 paper (oral)
* "Scaling Graph Neural Networks with Approximate PageRank"
* by Aleksandar Bojchevski, Johannes Klicpera, Bryan Perozzi, Amol Kapoor, Martin Blais, Benedek Rózemberczki, Michal Lukasik, Stephan Günnemann
* 
## Abstract

*Graph neural networks* (GNNs) have emerged as a powerful approach for solving many network mining tasks. However, learning on large graphs remains a challenge - many recently proposed scalable GNN approaches rely on an *expensive message-passing* procedure to propagate information through the graph. We present the PPRGo model which utilizes an *efficient approximation of information diffusion* in GNNs resulting in significant speed gains while maintaining state-of-the-art prediction performance. In addition to being faster, PPRGo is inherently scalable, and can be trivially parallelized for large datasets like those found in industry settings. We demonstrate that PPRGo outperforms baselines in both distributed and single-machine training environments on a number of commonly used academic graphs. To better analyze the scalability of large-scale graph learning methods, we introduce a novel benchmark graph with 12.4 million nodes, 173 million edges, and 2.8 million node features. We show that training PPRGo from scratch and predicting labels for all nodes in this graph takes under 2 minutes on a single machine, far outpacing other baselines on the same graph. We discuss the practical application of PPRGo to solve large-scale node classification problems at Google.


## Overview
<iframe width="600" height="400" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/AlOrhX3Rx0Y" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>


## Presentation
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/6W4TNysVFtU" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>