---
layout: post
title: ICCV Authors Guidelines
date: 2022-11-03
categories: [computer science]
tags: [machine learning, graph mining]

---

### Article Source

* [ICCV Authors Guidelines](https://iccv2021.thecvf.com/node/4)


---

# ICCV Authors Guidelines

## Call for Papers

Important: Please note that the policies have been extensively updated
from the 2019 version, including guidelines related to code submission,
and research areas.

Papers in the main technical program must describe high-quality,
original research. Topics of interest include the following aspects of
computer vision and pattern recognition:

-   3D from a single image and shape-from-x
-   Action and behavior recognition
-   Adversarial learning
-   Biometrics
-   Computational photography
-   Datasets and evaluation
-   Detection and localization in 2D and 3D
-   Efficient training and inference methods
-   Explainable AI
-   Faces
-   Fairness, accountability, transparency, and ethics in vision
-   Gestures and body pose
-   Image and video synthesis
-   Image and video retrieval
-   Image and video manipulation detection and integrity methods.
-   Low-level and physics-based vision
-   Machine learning architectures and formulations
-   Medical, biological, and cell microscopy
-   Motion and tracking
-   Neural generative models
-   Optimization and learning methods
-   Recognition and classification
-   Representation learning
-   Scene analysis and understanding
-   Scene text and document understanding
-   Segmentation, grouping and shape
-   Stereo, 3D from multiview and other sensors
-   Transfer/Low-shot/Semi/Unsupervised Learning
-   Video analysis and understanding
-   Vision + language
-   Vision + other modalities
-   Vision applications and systems
-   Vision for robotics and autonomous vehicles
-   Visual reasoning and logical representation

All submissions will be handled electronically. In addition to the main
technical program, the conference will include Tutorials, Workshops,
Demonstrations, and Exhibits. Submit proposals to the appropriate chair.

### Policies

Review Process: By submitting a paper to ICCV, the authors agree to the
review process and understand that papers are processed by the Toronto
system to match each manuscript to the best possible area chairs and
reviewers.

Confidentiality: The review process of ICCV is confidential. Reviewers
are volunteers not part of the ICCV organisation and their efforts are
greatly appreciated. The practice of keeping all information
confidential during the review is part of the standard communication to
all reviewers. Misuse of confidential information is a severe
professional failure and appropriate measures will be taken when brought
to the attention of ICCV organizers. It should be noted, however, that
the organization of ICCV is not and cannot be held responsible for the
consequences when reviewers break confidentiality.

Conflict Responsibilities: It is the primary author's responsibility to
ensure that all authors on their paper have registered their
institutional conflicts into CMT (see details under Domain Conflicts
below). If a paper is found to have an undeclared or incorrect
institutional conflict, the paper may be summarily rejected. To avoid
undeclared conflicts, the author list is considered to be final after
the submission deadline and no changes are allowed for accepted papers.

Double blind review: ICCV reviewing is double blind, in that authors do
not know the names of the area chairs/reviewers of their papers, and the
area chairs/reviewers cannot, beyond a reasonable doubt, infer the names
of the authors from the submission and the additional material. Avoid
providing information that may identify the authors in the
acknowledgments (e.g., co-workers and grant IDs) and in the supplemental
material (e.g., titles in the movies, or attached papers). Avoid
providing links to websites that identify the authors. Violation of any
of these guidelines may lead to rejection without review. If you need to
cite a different paper of yours that is being submitted concurrently to
ICCV, the authors should (1) cite these papers; (2) argue in the body of
your paper why your ICCV paper is non trivially different from these
concurrent submissions; and (3) include anonymized versions of those
papers in the supplemental material.

Plagiarism: Plagiarism consists of appropriating the words or results of
another, without credit. ICCV 2021's policy on plagiarism is to refer
suspected cases to the IEEE Intellectual Property office, which has an
established mechanism for dealing with plagiarism and wide powers of
excluding offending authors from future conferences and IEEE journals.
You can find information on this office, their procedures, and their
definitions of five levels of plagiarism at [this
webpage](https://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/plagiarism.html).
We will be actively checking for plagiarism. Furthermore, the paper
matching system is quite accurate. As a result, it regularly happens
that a paper containing plagiarized material goes to a reviewer from
whom material was plagiarized; experience shows that such reviewers
pursue plagiarism cases enthusiastically.

Dual/Double Submissions: The goals of ICCV are to publish exciting new
work for the first time and to avoid duplicating the effort of
reviewers.

By submitting a manuscript to ICCV, authors acknowledge that it has not
been previously published or accepted for publication in a substantially
similar form in any peer-reviewed venue including journal, conference,
workshop, or archival forum. Furthermore, no publication substantially
similar in content has been or will be submitted to this or another
conference, workshop, or journal during the review period. Violation of
any of these conditions will lead to rejection, and will be reported to
the other venue to which the submission was sent.

A publication, for the purposes of this policy, is defined to be a
written work longer than four pages (excluding references) that was
submitted for review by peers for either acceptance or rejection, and,
after review, was accepted. In particular, this definition of
publication does not depend upon whether such an accepted written work
appears in a formal proceedings or whether the organizers declare that
such work "counts as a publication".

The above definition does not consider an [arXiv.org](http://arxiv.org/)
paper as a publication because it cannot be rejected. It also excludes
university technical reports which are typically not peer reviewed.
However, this definition of publication does include peer-reviewed
workshop papers, even if they do not appear in a proceedings, if their
length is more than four pages (excluding citations). Given this
definition, any submission to ICCV should not have substantial overlap
with prior publications or other concurrent submissions.

Note that a technical report (departmental,
[arXiv.org](http://arxiv.org/), etc.) version of the submission that is
put up without any form of direct peer-review is NOT considered prior
art and should NOT be cited in the submission.

A submission with substantial overlap is one that shares 20 percent or
more material with previous or concurrently submitted publications. Such
submissions will be considered plagiarism (self or otherwise). Please
refer to the [IEEE Guidelines for Handling
Plagiarism](https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/plagiarism/plagiarism.html)
for more information.

Attendance responsibilities: The authors agree that if the paper is
accepted, at least one of the authors will register for the conference
and present the paper there.

Publication: All accepted papers will be made publicly available by the
Computer Vision Foundation (CVF) two weeks before the conference.
Authors wishing to submit a patent understand that the paper's official
public disclosure is two weeks before the conference or whenever the
authors make it publicly available, whichever is first. The conference
considers papers confidential until published two weeks before the
conferences, but notes that multiple organizations will have access
during the review and production processes, so those seeking patents
should discuss filing dates with their IP council. The conference
assumes no liability for early disclosures. More information about CVF
is available at[https://www.thecvf.com](https://www.thecvf.com/).

Publicity, social media: Papers submitted to ICCV must not be discussed
with the press until they have been officially accepted for publication.
Work explicitly identified as an ICCV submission also may not be
advertised on social media. Please see the FAQ below for more details.
Violations may result in the paper being rejected or removed from the
conference and proceedings.

### Submission Guidelines

All submissions will be handled electronically via the conference's CMT
Website. By submitting a paper, the authors agree to the policies
stipulated in this website. The paper and author registration deadline
is March 10, 2021, the submission deadline is March 17, 2021.
Supplementary material can be submitted until March 24, 2021.

Papers are limited to eight pages, including figures and tables, in the
ICCV style. Additional pages containing only cited references are
allowed. Please refer to the following files for detailed formatting
instructions:

-   Example submission paper with detailed instructions
    [Download](http://iccv2021.thecvf.com/sites/default/files/2020-09/egpaper_for_review.pdf)
-   LaTeX Templates (zip): iccv2021AuthorKit.zip
    [Download](http://iccv2021.thecvf.com/sites/default/files/2020-09/iccv2021AuthorKit.zip)
-   LaTeX Templates (zip): iccv2021RebuttalKit.zip
    [Download](http://iccv2021.thecvf.com/sites/default/files/2020-09/iccv2021RebuttalKit.zip)

Papers that are not properly anonymized, or do not use the template, or
have more than eight pages (excluding references) will be rejected
without review.

1) Paper submission and review site:

Submission Site ([now
open](http://cmt3.research.microsoft.com/ICCV2021/))

Please make sure that your browser has cookies and Javascript enabled.

Please add "<email@msr-cmt.org>" to your list of safe senders
(whitelist) to prevent important email announcements from being blocked
by spam filters.

It is the primary author's responsibility to ensure that all authors on
their paper have registered their institutional conflicts into CMT. Each
author should list domains of all institutions they have worked for, or
have had very close collaboration with, within the last 3 years
(example: [mit.edu](http://mit.edu/); [ox.ac.uk](http://ox.ac.uk/);
[microsoft.com](http://microsoft.com/)). DO NOT enter the domain of
email providers such as [gmail.com](http://gmail.com/). This
institutional conflict information will be used in conjunction with
prior authorship conflict information to resolve assignments to both
reviewers and area chairs. If a paper is found to have an undeclared or
incorrect institutional conflict, the paper may be summarily rejected.

4) Creating a paper submission: This step must be completed by the
paper registration deadline. After this deadline, you will not be able
to register new papers, but you will be able to edit the information for
existing papers.

(a) Click the "+ Create new submission" button in the upper-left to
create a new submission. There, you will be prompted to enter the title,
abstract, authors, and subject areas. You are strongly encouraged to
finalize the author list by the registration deadline.

(b) Check with your co-authors to make sure that: (1) you add them
with their correct CMT email; and (2) they have entered their domain
conflicts into CMT for ICCV 2021. If you add an author with an email
that is not in CMT and the name and organization is not automatically
filled, that means they are not yet in the system, and you should make
sure to check that they do not already have an account under a different
email before completing the requested information to add them.

(c) Enter subject (topic) areas for your paper. You must include at
least one primary area. This information is used to help assign ACs and
reviewers.

5) Paper Number

Once you have registered your paper (i.e. title/authors), you will be
assigned a paper number. Insert this into the latex before generating
the pdf of your paper for submission. Papers submitted without a number
may not be reviewed.

6) Submission Requirements:

The maximum size of the abstract is 4000 characters.

The paper must be PDF only (maximum 50MB). Make sure your paper meets
the formatting and anonymity requirements described above.

The supplementary material can be either PDF or ZIP only (maximum
100MB).

7) Supplementary Material Submission: By the supplementary material
deadline, the authors may optionally submit additional material that was
ready at the time of paper submission but could not be included due to
constraints of format or space. The authors should refer to the contents
of the supplementary material appropriately in the paper. Reviewers will
be encouraged to look at it, but are not obligated to do so.

Supplementary material may include videos, proofs, additional figures or
tables, more detailed analysis of experiments presented in the paper, or
a concurrent submission to ICCV or another conference. Itmay not include
results on additional datasets, results obtained with an improved
version of the method (e.g., following additional parameter tuning or
training), or an updated or corrected version of the submission PDF.
Papers with supplementary materials violating the guidelines may be
summarily rejected.

8) Code Submission and Reproducibility: To improve reproducibility in
AI research, we highly encourage authors to voluntarily submit their
code as part of supplementary material. Authors should also use the
[Reproducibility
Checklist](https://www.cs.mcgill.ca/~jpineau/ReproducibilityChecklist.pdf)
as a guide for writing reproducible papers. Reviewers are encouraged to
check the submitted code to ensure that the paper's results are
trustworthy and reproducible. The code should be anonymized, e.g.,
author names, institutions and licenses should be removed. We do not
expect authors to submit private/sensitive data, only sufficient data to
demonstrate the method. All code/data will be reviewed confidentially
and kept private.

### Detailed supplementary material guidelines:

(a) All supplementary material must be self-contained and zipped into
a single file. The following formats are allowed: avi, mp4, pdf, wmv.
CMT imposes a 100MB limit on the size of this file. Note that you can
update the file by uploading a new one (the old one will be deleted and
replaced).

(b) The paper for review (PDF only) must be submitted first before the
supplementary material (PDF or ZIP only) can be submitted.

### Rebuttal Instructions

After receiving the reviews, authors may optionally submit a rebuttal to
address the reviewers' comments, which will be limited to a one page
PDF file using the "ICCV 2021 Rebuttal Template" which can be
downloaded from this link:

iccv2021RebuttalKit.zip.  ([link to
attachment](http://iccv2021.thecvf.com/sites/default/files/2020-09/iccv2021RebuttalKit.zip))

The rebuttal must maintain anonymity and cannot include external links
that reveal the author identity or circumvent the length restriction.

Responses longer than one page will simply not be reviewed. This
includes responses where the margins and formatting are deemed to have
been significantly altered from those specified by the style guide.

The author rebuttal is optional and is meant to provide you with an
opportunity to rebut factual errors or to supply additional information
requested by the reviewers. It is NOT intended to add new contributions
(theorems, algorithms, experiments) that were absent in the original
submission and NOT specifically requested by the reviewers. You may
optionally add a figure, graph or proof to your rebuttal to better
illustrate your answer to the reviewers' comments.

Per a passed 2018 PAMI-TC motion, reviewers should refrain from
requesting significant additional experiments for the rebuttal, or
penalize for lack of additional experiments. Authors should refrain from
including new experimental results in the rebuttal, especially when not
specifically requested to do so by the reviewers.

### Author FAQs 

**About Submitting Papers**

Q. Can we please have an extension on the deadline?

A. NO. And any incomplete submission or a submission not meeting the
required criteria will be deleted.

Q. Can we get my quota increased for the size of paper submission from
30 MB to something higher?

A. NO. We have set hard limits of 30MB (PDF Only) for paper submission
and 100MB (PDF or ZIP only) for supplementary materials for submissions
for review. As we are expecting many submissions, and as each reviewer
is expected to review multiple papers, larger file downloads (and
uploads) will tax the system and abilities of reviewers to get to the
papers fast enough. Authors should consider adding hi-res images as
supplementary material (see supplementary material guidelines).

Q. How do I delete Supplementary Material from the CMT site?

A. After you log in, in the "Author" console, you'll notice
"Upload/Delete File" at the end of the supplementary file name. Click
on that, and in the page that appears, you can click on the "Delete"
button to remove the supplementary file. (Please note that you will not
be able to delete the supplementary file after the supplementary
material deadline.)

Q. Can we submit color images with our papers for review?

A. YES. Reviewers will get the exact pdf file of the paper you
submitted, so they can see the color images on the screen. Do be warned
though that many reviews still like to read printed papers and not all
have access to high-end color printers. Please make sure to comment in
the paper to request the reviewers to see the color online copy.

Q. What is ICCV 2021 policy on DUAL SUBMISSIONS?

A. Please read the dual/double submission section above.

Q. Does a Technical Report (departmental, arXiv, etc.) available online
count as a prior publication, and therefore is that work ineligible for
review and publication at ICCV 2021?

A. Please read the dual/double submission section above.

Q. Does a document on GitHub or other open repositories count as a
publication, and therefore is ineligible for review and publication at
ICCV 2021?

A. Submissions to GitHub and similar repositories cannot be rejected and
are accepted by default before any "review" that can take place on
such platforms. Given definitions in the dual/double submission
paragraph above, GitHub documents are not publications and won't be
treated as such. To preserve anonymity, you should not cite your public
codebase. You can say that the code will be made publicly available.

Q. Does a presentation at a departmental seminar during the review
period violate the anonymity standard or other ICCV 2021 policy?

A. NO. Authors must properly anonymize the written submission as per the
guidelines. There is no requirement that the material otherwise be kept
confidential during the review process.

Q. Can I promote my paper in the press or on social media?

A. As stated in the instructions above, authors are not allowed to go to
the press with their submission prior to the end of the review process,
or to advertise their work on social media while explicitly identifying
it as an ICCV submission. In recent conference cycles, some authors were
found posting about their submissions on Twitter or other social media,
and even including the title or a snapshot of the paper. This is a
violation of anonymity, since the message may go out to many potential
reviewers.

Authors must not:

-   Talk to the media about your work as "in submission to ICCV"
-   Make any posts to social media or elsewhere that can be linked to a
    specific ICCV submission (e.g., mentioning the title of the
    submission or details and content and saying that it's an ICCV
    submission)

Authors may:

-   Talk about their work in a presentation without saying it's
    submitted to ICCV
-   Submit to arXiv without mentioning ICCV

A paper may be rejected if the program chairs feel that the authors have
attempted to let potential reviewers know who wrote the paper.

Q. How do I cite my results reported in open challenges?

A. To conform with the double blind review policy, you can report
results of other challenge participants together with your results in
your paper. For your results, however, you should not identify yourself
and should not mention your participation in the challenge. Instead
present your results referring to the method proposed in your paper and
draw conclusions based on the experimental comparison to other results.

Q. Does my submission need to cite arXiv papers that are related to my
work?

A. Consistent with good academic practice, you need to cite all sources
that inspired and informed your own work. This said, asking authors to
thoroughly compare their work with arXiv reports that appeared shortly
before the submission deadline imposes an unreasonable burden. We also
do not wish to discourage the publication of similar ideas that have
been developed independently and concurrently. Authors and reviewers
should keep the following guidelines in mind:

-   Authors are not required to discuss and compare their work with
    recent arXiv reports, although they must properly cite those that
    inspired them.
-   To reduce confusion, whenever citing papers that initially appeared
    on arXiv, the authors should check whether those papers had
    subsequently been published in a peer-reviewed venue, and to cite
    those versions accordingly.
-   Failing to cite an arXiv paper or failing to beat its performance
    SHOULD NOT be sole grounds for rejection.
-   Reviewers SHOULD NOT reject a paper solely because another paper
    with a similar idea has already appeared on arXiv. If the reviewer
    suspects plagiarism or academic dishonesty, they are encouraged to
    bring these concerns to the attention of Area and Program Chairs.
-   It is acceptable for a reviewer to suggest that an author should
    acknowledge or be aware of something on arXiv.

**About the Review Process**

Q. Is the ICCV 2021 Review Process CONFIDENTIAL?

A. YES, ICCV 2021 Reviewing is considered confidential. All reviewers
are required to keep every manuscript they review as confidential
documents and not to share or distribute materials for any reason except
to facilitate the reviewing of the submitted work.

Q. Are ICCV 2021 Reviews Double BLIND or Single BLIND?

A. ICCV reviewing is Double BLIND, in that authors do not know the names
of the area chairs/reviewers of their papers, and area chairs/reviewers
do not know the names of the authors. Please read Section 1.6 of the
example paper egpaper_for_review.pdf for detailed instructions on how to
preserve anonymity. Avoid providing information that may identify the
authors in the acknowledgments (e.g., co-workers and grant IDs) and in
the supplemental material (e.g., titles in the movies, or attached
papers). Avoid providing links to websites that identify the authors.
Violation of any of these guidelines will lead to rejection without
review.

 

ICCV'21 Program Chairs can be contacted via
[iccv2021_pcs@googlegroups.com](iccv2021_pcs@googlegroups.com)
