---
layout: post
title: Explainable Deep Learning for Structured Data
date: 2023-09-12
categories: [artificial intelligence]
tags: [machine learning]

---

### Article Source

* [Explainable Deep Learning for Structured Data](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tQuIcLDO5iE)

---

# Explainable Deep Learning for Structured Data

* Sercan Arik
* Research Scientist Google Cloud AI

## Abstract

Dr. Sercan Arik is currently working as a Research Scientist at Google Cloud AI. His work is motivated by the mission of democratizing AI and bringing it to the most impactful use cases, from Healthcare, Finance, Retail, Media, Education, Communications and many other industries. Towards this goal, he focuses on how to make AI more high-performance for the most-demanded data types, interpretable, trustable, data-efficient, robust and reliable. He led research projects that were launched as major Google Cloud products and yielded significant business impact, such as TabNet and Covid-19 forecasting. Before joining Google, he was a Research Scientist at Baidu Silicon Valley AI Lab. At Baidu, he has focused on deep learning research, particularly for applications in human-technology interfaces. He co-developed deep learning-based state-of-the-art speech synthesis (Deep Voice 1, Deep Voice 2 and Deep Voice 3), keyword spotting, voice cloning, and neural architecture search systems. Prior to Baidu, he completed my PhD degree in Electrical Engineering at Stanford University in 2016. He has co-authored more than 50 journal and conference publications.

<iframe width="600" height="400" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/tQuIcLDO5iE?si=0sYxOsR4gLJluuHm" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" allowfullscreen></iframe>