---
layout: post
title: What Does Machine Learning Have to Offer Mathematics?
date: 2024-08-16
categories: [artificial intelligence]
tags: [machine learning]

---

### Article Source


* [What Does Machine Learning Have to Offer Mathematics?](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_MkbQ38_VSs)

---



# What Does Machine Learning Have to Offer Mathematics?


## Abstract

The interaction of machine learning with math has attracted a lot of attention, because mathematics is in some respects a closed world with well-defined rules (like chess, and unlike poetry-writing) but also a domain where success is ultimately judged by human assessments of ingenuity and importance, not rigid criteria (like poetry-writing, and unlike chess). Can machines prove theorems? Can they have mathematical ideas? Jordan Ellenberg will talk about his joint work with researchers from DeepMind, which used novel techniques in machine learning to make progress in a problem in combinatorics, and will try to chart some near-term ways that machine learning may affect mathematical practice.

Jordan Ellenberg is a professor of mathematics at the University of Wisconsin–Madison specializing in number theory and arithmetic geometry, with additional interests in combinatorics, topology, and applications of machine learning to pure math. He is also the author of two general-audience books on mathematics, How Not to Be Wrong and Shape, as well as many articles in newspapers and magazines.

<iframe width="600" height="400" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/_MkbQ38_VSs?si=Ao95TrQ9h79eX4PQ" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>