---
layout: post
title: Unlock Data Insights Faster with AI-Generated Sample Data
date: 2024-02-23
categories: [artificial intelligence]
tags: [machine learning]

---

### Article Source


* [Unlock Data Insights Faster with AI-Generated Sample Data](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UfOsponwlqA&list=PLRszrsPs6Khx031BORUAzLUrG9jX9nbPp&index=6)

---

# Unlock Data Insights Faster with AI-Generated Sample Data

## Abstract


Struggling to gain insights from data you can't access? Atlan's revolutionary AI capability enables generating synthetic sample data for analytics and modeling when you can't view real data.

In this video, see how Atlan can instantly produce realistic, representative sample datasets with a single click. It uses metadata and data profiling to generate dummy data that maintains the structure, patterns, and distribution of the real data - without exposing any sensitive or regulated information.

Whether you're an analyst, data scientist, or developer, being able to securely simulate sample data saves huge time otherwise spent requesting access and approvals. Atlan's AI removes data access bottlenecks, accelerates insights, and opens up new possibilities for experimentation.

If you find this cool, we’re sure you’d love Atlan, the only data catalog that activates your metadata. Check it out here: https://atln.cm/y/home

Atlan — The Only Data Catalog That Activates Your Metadata 

Atlan is the leading active metadata platform for modern data teams. It creates a single source of truth by acting as a collaborative workspace for data teams and bringing context back into the tools where data teams live. Atlan features deep integrations across the modern data stack, including Slack, Snowflake, dbt Labs, Fivetran, Redshift, Looker, and Tableau. A pioneer in the space, Atlan was named a Leader in the Forrester Wave™: Enterprise Data Catalogs for DataOps and was recognized by Gartner seven times in 2021.

<iframe width="600" height="400" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/UfOsponwlqA?si=bisSKKcFMcwu9IyH" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" allowfullscreen></iframe>



